Abstract
Background
Pharmacy closures have become increasingly prevalent in the United States in recent years. Previous literature highlights socioeconomic and racial disparities in the distribution of pharmacy deserts.
Objectives
To identify and characterize pharmacy deserts in Virginia and to simulate potential locations to minimize inequities in pharmacy distribution.
Methods
This cross-sectional study used active pharmacy permits data from the Virginia Board of Pharmacy to identify census tracts considered pharmacy deserts by simultaneously satisfying 2 criteria: 1) low-income status (>20% residents living below the federal poverty line, or median household income <80% of a local comparator); and 2) low-access to pharmacies (distance >1, 5, or 10 miles for urban, suburban, and rural census tracts, respectively). Demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of desert vs. nondesert tracts were compared using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. Locations within identified pharmacy deserts were randomly generated in 10,000 independent iterations.
Results
Of 2198 census tracts, 51 were considered pharmacy deserts, and 69 met the low-access criterion only. Pharmacy deserts were significantly more common in urban census tracts (5.5%), followed by rural (2.9%), and suburban (0.1%). Compared to nondesert, pharmacy desert tracts had significantly lower percentage of residents under 18 year-old, greater percentage of Black residents, uninsured, with Medicare or Medicaid coverage only, lower median household income, and greater percentage of residents living in poverty. Through geospatial simulation, 44 locations were identified where adding pharmacy services could significantly improve access, each potentially benefiting over 10,000 individuals.
Conclusion
Fifty-one tracts in Virginia, primarily in urban areas, were considered pharmacy deserts. Compared to nondeserts, pharmacy desert status was associated with a lower proportion of residents under 18 year-old, greater proportion of Black and uninsured/publicly insured residents, and high poverty level, highlighting disparities in pharmacy access. Geospatial simulation identified several locations where placement of pharmacy services could benefit the largest number of residents living in desert tracts.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Key Points
Background
•
Pharmacy closures have become increasingly prevalent in the United States in the last 20 years and earlier studies at the city, county, and state levels highlight socioeconomic and racial disparities in the distribution of pharmacy deserts.
•
Previous studies have focused on identifying and characterizing pharmacy deserts, without offering insights into potential future locations to minimize inequities in the distribution of pharmacies.
•
In Virginia, internal data from the Board of Pharmacy revealed that the number of pharmacy permits decreased by about 6% between June 2016 and May 2024, mirroring a recent national analysis that identified a 5.4% decrease in pharmacies per 10,000 population from 2018 to 2021.
Findings
•
Based on explicit criteria to define pharmacy deserts from previous literature, we identified 51 primarily urban tracts in Virginia that were considered pharmacy deserts.
•
Pharmacy desert status was associated with a lower proportion of residents under 18 year-old, greater proportion of Black and uninsured/publicly insured residents, and high poverty level, highlighting disparities in pharmacy access.
•
We further identified 44 locations through geospatial simulation where placement of pharmacy services could benefit the largest number of residents living in desert tracts.
Access to primary care in the United States (US) is challenging for over 100 million people.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 This can be due to various factors including primary care physician shortages,1,3 residential and business clustering patterns, and rurality.6, 7, 8 Community-based pharmacists play a crucial role in primary care and public health by providing access to medications and offering additional services including immunizations, medication management, acute care under test-to-treat protocols, oral contraceptives, substance use disorder prevention, among others.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
Pharmacy closures have become increasingly prevalent in the US in the last 20 years. One study estimated that 1 in 8 pharmacies closed between 2009 and 2015.15 The same study found that independent community pharmacies were more likely to close than chain pharmacies.15 Despite this, 3 large pharmacy chains recently announced plans to close thousands of stores nationwide.16, 17, 18 Reasons cited for closures include financial challenges resulting from rising operational costs and low reimbursement rates from insurance companies; pharmacy benefits managers (PBM) fees; increased market competition from large chain pharmacies or online pharmacies; modifications to consumer behavior that prioritize the convenience and lower prices of mail order or online pharmacies; staffing shortages; and decreased store investment leading to low customer satisfaction.16,19, 20, 21, 22 Notably, urban areas serving low-income, uninsured or publicly insured populations were at the highest risk for pharmacy closures.15 Pharmacy closures have a greater impact among already medically underserved areas.23 For example, closures in underserved rural communities resulted in significant increases in travel time to urban areas where the closest pharmacy was located.24 Further, pharmacy closures were associated with a decline in medication adherence to chronic medications.25
Areas with low access to pharmacies and pharmacist services have been termed pharmacy deserts.26 Interest in identifying and characterizing pharmacy deserts using various spatial statistical methods has increased in the past decade, in part due to advances in geographic information systems capabilities.27 These methods estimate the relationship between pharmacies, sociodemographic characteristics, and population-based health outcomes. A recent analysis estimated that approximately 4% of U.S. residents live in pharmacy deserts.28 Pharmacy desert areas were characterized by lower education levels, lack of health insurance, low English-speaking ability, and high proportions of racial and ethnic minorities.28 These results confirmed findings from several earlier studies at the city, county, and state levels throughout the US, highlighting socioeconomic and racial disparities in the distribution of pharmacy deserts.26,29, 30, 31, 32
In Virginia, internal data from the Board of Pharmacy revealed that the number of pharmacy permits decreased by about 6% between June 2016 and May 2024, which mirrors the results of a recent national analysis that identified a 5.4% decrease in operating pharmacies in Virginia per 10,000 population between 2018 and 2021.33 Consistently between June 2023 and May 2024, 5 counties in Virginia (i.e., Rappahannock, Nelson, King and Queen, Surry, and Charles City) did not have a single chain or independent community pharmacy. Additionally, in May 2024, there were at least 11 counties with only one pharmacy. In light of these data and recent publications describing the rise of pharmacy deserts throughout the US, the aim of this study was to identify and characterize pharmacy deserts in Virginia and to simulate potential future locations to minimize inequities in the distribution of pharmacies.
Methods
This cross-sectional, geospatial study identified and characterized census tracts in Virginia considered pharmacy deserts and created a simulation model to predict potential locations for pharmacies that would minimize inequities in pharmacy access across the Commonwealth. A list of pharmacies with an active permit operating in Virginia as of May 20, 2024 was obtained from the Virginia Board of Pharmacy. Pharmacy types included in the analysis comprised: independent community, chain community, federally qualified health center (FQHC), free clinics, community services board, health departments, and hospital pharmacy. The different types of facilities were selected due to their ability to provide medications to individuals from different socioeconomic backgrounds. Types of pharmacy excluded from the analysis were: free standing emergency department, home health/infusion, long-term care, mail order pharmacy only, nuclear pharmacy, opioid treatment program, student health, and veterinary only pharmacy.
Identification and characterization of pharmacy deserts
Pharmacy deserts were identified based on the definition by Qato et al.26, and recently applied by Wittenauer et al.28, whereby a pharmacy desert was defined as a census tract that met 2 criteria: 1) low-income area and 2) low access to pharmacies. A tract met the low-income criterion if greater than 20% of its residents were living below the federal poverty line34, or if its median household income was less than 80% of a relevant comparator. Specifically, for this latter condition, if a tract fell within the boundaries of a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), the median household income of the MSA was used; if not, the median household income of Virginia was used. To determine access to pharmacies, tracts were characterized as urban, suburban, or rural if their population density (persons per square mile of land area) was greater than 5000, between 1000 and 5000, and less than 1000, respectively.35, 36, 37 For each block group in the census tract, the nearest straight-line distance from the block group centroid to an operating pharmacy was calculated. If this distance was greater than 1, 5, or 10 miles for urban, suburban, and rural census tracts, respectively, the block group's population was considered to be a low-access to pharmacies block group. This process was repeated for all block groups in the census tract. Finally, if greater than one-third of the overall census tract's population was low-access, the tract was considered to meet the low-access criterion. A census tract meeting both the low-income and low-access criteria was considered a pharmacy desert. For a very small number of desert tracts proximate to state borders, an Internet search was performed (Google Maps) to assess whether pharmacies may have been accessible (with respect to the appropriate distance threshold based on the urbanicity of the tract) on the other side of the border, according to its “measure distance” tool from the centroid of the census tract to the non-Virginia pharmacy location. This additional step was performed to assess uncertainty surrounding any identified pharmacy desert census tracts near state borders.
Demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of all tracts were based on the 2022 American Community Survey estimates for census tracts and their constituent block groups in Virginia,38 including the following: percent Black residents, percent White residents, percent older than 65 year-old, percent below 18 year-old, percent of uninsured, percent with Medicare only, percent with Medicaid only, household median income, percent below federal poverty line, area deprivation index (ADI),39 and social vulnerability index (SVI).40 The index variables (ADI and SVI) were utilized because they comprise measures such as income, education, employment, and housing quality, thus reflecting a multi-dimensional concept of economic and/or social disadvantage.41 For these indices, larger scores are associated with greater neighborhood-level disadvantage.
Simulation of new pharmacy locations
Geographic locations in Virginia were simulated to identify where adding pharmacies would benefit the greatest number of residents currently living in pharmacy deserts. Specifically, locations that fell within the geographic extent of an identified pharmacy desert were randomly generated in 10,000 independent iterations. In each iteration, a random location that could represent placement of additional pharmacies was generated within the geographic extent of the set of identified pharmacy deserts. The simulated location was added to the database of existing pharmacies, and the low-access criterion was re-calculated for every census tract identified as a pharmacy desert. In many cases, the simulated location would make the census tract no longer a pharmacy desert, as it would provide adequate access. In this case, the number of tracts that were “prevented” from desert status and the corresponding tract population were recorded. The results of this process were mapped to identify the geographic locations where adding pharmacy services could add the greatest population benefit (e.g., number of residents prevented from living in a pharmacy desert census tract).
Statistical analysis
Comparison of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of desert vs. nondesert tracts was performed using Wilcoxon rank sum tests owing to the skew and non-normal distribution of many of these variables. Distances, performed geospatial operations, and randomly generated pharmacy locations were determined using the “sf” package in R.42,43 All statistical and geospatial analyses were conducted and maps were created in R, Version 4.3.1, using a 5% significance level.
Results
As of May 2024, there were 1744 active pharmacy permits in Virginia. A total of 1603 (92%) pharmacies met the inclusion criteria for the analysis, of which 1045 were chain community, 318 independent community, 162 hospital pharmacy, and 78 FQHCs/free clinics/health departments/community services board.
Identification and characterization of pharmacy deserts
Of 2198 census tracts in Virginia, 475 (comprising 21.9% of its residents) were urban, 902 (43.7%) were suburban, and 821 (34.5%) were rural. The percentage of census tracts that did not contain any pharmacies was 60.2% for urban tracts, 55.8% for suburban tracts, and 65.8% for rural tracts. Fifty-one of the 2198 census tracts fulfilled the low-income and low-access criteria and were thus classified as pharmacy deserts (Figure 1). Pharmacy deserts accounted for 2.3% of the tracts and 1.8% of the population (or 158,262 total residents) in the Commonwealth. Of the 51 census tracts identified as pharmacy deserts, 50 contained no pharmacies; the remaining pharmacy desert tract contained one pharmacy.

Download: Download high-res image (248KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Figure 1. Pharmacy desert census tracts in Virginia, 2024.

The geographic distribution of the pharmacy desert tracts was variable, with several occurring in the Richmond and Virginia Beach metropolitan areas, and others occurring in the southern and western regions of the Commonwealth in rural areas. There was a statistically significant association between urbanicity and pharmacy desert status (P < 0.001). Urban census tracts were more frequently pharmacy deserts (5.5% of tracts) than rural (2.9%) and suburban (0.1%). Specifically, 7 tracts in Norfolk city, 5 tracts in Richmond city, 4 tracts in Halifax County, and 3 tracts in both Newport News city and Chesapeake city were considered pharmacy deserts (full list in Appendix Table 1). Four of the 51 desert tracts may have had access to a pharmacy on the other side of the state border, but this was unable to be determined based on available information online.
Additionally, 69 census tracts comprising 288,326 residents (3.3% of the population) met the low-access criterion only, and 685 other tracts comprising 2,272,119 residents (26.3% of the population) met the low-income criterion only.
Comparing demographic and socioeconomic characteristics between desert and nondesert tracts, the former had significantly lower percentage of residents below 18 years-old (P = 0.016), significantly greater percentage of Black residents (P < 0.001), uninsured (P < 0.001), with Medicare coverage only (P < 0.001), and with Medicaid coverage only (P < 0.001) (Table 1). Regarding economic factors, desert tracts had significantly lower median household income (P < 0.001), greater percentage of residents living in poverty (P < 0.001), and greater values of ADI (P < 0.001) and SVI (P < 0.001).
Table 1. Comparison of distribution of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics between desert and nondesert tracts

Variable	Median (IQR)	P-value
Desert (n = 51)	Nondesert (n = 2147)
Median household incomea	$51,870 ($48,827, $57,716)	$84,840 ($60,709, $124,318)	<0.001
% Below the FPLa	0.148 (0.111, 0.193)	0.081 (0.040, 0.145)	<0.001
% Blacka	0.283 (0.168, 0.474)	0.124 (0.045, 0.264)	<0.001
% White	0.578 (0.363, 0.753)	0.673 (0.489, 0.821)	0.051
% Older than 65 y	0.175 (0.107, 0.231)	0.160 (0.111, 0.216)	0.384
% Below 18 ya	0.189 (0.140, 0.235)	0.212 (0.170, 0.253)	0.016
Area deprivation Indexa	117 (112, 123)	100 (86, 113)	<0.001
Social vulnerability Indexa	0.692 (0.534, 0.827)	0.494 (0.246, 0.744)	<0.001
% Without insurancea	0.097 (0.068, 0.129)	0.061 (0.034, 0.099)	<0.001
% With Medicare onlya	0.072 (0.044, 0.112)	0.048 (0.029, 0.075)	<0.001
% With Medicaid onlya	0.172 (0.143, 0.221)	0.089 (0.038, 0.154)	<0.001
Abbreviations used: FPL, Federal Poverty Line; IQR, inter-quartile range.
a
denotes statistically significant difference using Wilcoxon tests with P < 0.05.
Simulation of new pharmacy locations
The vast majority (86.7%) of simulated pharmacy locations prevented at least one census tract from being a pharmacy desert, and certain simulated locations prevented 2 (11.9%), 3 (2.7%), and 4 (0.03%) tracts from desert status (Figure 2). Ultimately, 44 simulated locations in Halifax County and the Virginia Beach metropolitan areas would prevent more than 10,000 residents from desert status (Figure 3). The 3 simulated locations preventing the largest number of residents (15,321) from desert status are located in Chesapeake city.

Download: Download high-res image (219KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Figure 2. Number of residents of pharmacy desert census tracts prevented from desert status through the placement of pharmacy locations. In the map, a point represents the randomly-generated location of a potential pharmacy location within an identified pharmacy desert census tract, and its color indicates the efficacy of the potential location, with darker colors indicating a larger number of population potentially prevented from desert status (see legend, “population_saved”).


Download: Download high-res image (228KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Figure 3. Randomly-generated potential pharmacy locations preventing more than 10,000 population from desert status. In the map, each point represents the randomly-generated location of a potential pharmacy location within an identified desert census tract (from the simulations presented in Figure 2) that was calculated to prevent more than 10,000 population from desert status.

Discussion
This study identified 51 census tracts in Virginia in its western, southern, and Virginia Beach metropolitan areas that qualified as pharmacy deserts, corresponding to 1.8% of the population in the Commonwealth, which is lower than the national average (4.7%).28 Compared to nondeserts, pharmacy desert tracts had significantly lower percentage of residents below 18 years-old, greater percentage of Black residents, uninsured or with public insurance, lower median household income, greater percentage of residents living in poverty, and greater values of ADI and SVI. Further, our simulation found that adding pharmacies in targeted areas such as parts of Chesapeake city and Halifax County would prevent more than 10,000 residents of these areas from living in pharmacy deserts.
Our results are in line with previous literature describing a significantly higher number of pharmacy deserts in urban compared to rural areas.28,44 Additionally, our findings showed disparities in race and insurance status between residents of desert and nondesert tracts similar to those observed in a national analysis and our neighboring state of North Carolina.28,44 A study focusing on the 4 largest cities in the US found that pharmacy deserts became more common in the period 2015-2020, with deserts being more likely in predominantly Black and Latino neighborhoods.29 Our study further demonstrated significant differences in economic factors (i.e., median household income, percent in poverty, ADI, SVI) by pharmacy desert status, where desert tracts were characterized by lower economic resources. Other studies used different socioeconomic variables with findings consistent with those of our study. At the national level, individuals in counties with higher SVI with a lower primary care practitioner density had a 30%–40% higher likelihood to reside in a pharmacy desert.45 In North Carolina, pharmacy desert residents had less internet access, lower annual medical costs per capita, greater food insecurity rates, and higher Medicare cost per capita.44 These studies underscore the importance of ensuring adequate access to pharmacy services (not exclusively medication dispensing) to promote public health and mitigate existing health disparities among racial minorities and individuals of lower socioeconomic status who often face heightened health and access challenges.
Building on pharmacy desert identification and characterization, our analysis went a step further to identify specific locations where the greatest number of residents would benefit from additional pharmacy services. Some of the simulated locations would have a significant impact on the pharmacy desert landscape in Virginia. For example, adding one location for pharmacy services prevented over 15,000 residents and 4 census tracts from desert status in several of the iterations. Similar approaches to simulate the placement of new health care facilities and their corresponding effects on access to care have been described in the literature in the US and worldwide.46, 47, 48 An important implication of our study is that the simulated locations can guide alternative solutions to provide access to pharmacies in currently underserved areas. In areas where building traditional brick and mortar pharmacies is not a financially viable solution, a mobile unit could be deployed to serve those residents.49 This approach has been used as a way to provide access to other health care services in underserved communities, including HIV care50,51, sexually transmitted infections testing52, treatment of opioid use disorder53 and addiction54, and women's health.55 This would ensure that pharmacists could still provide public health services within their scope of practice (e.g., immunizations, medication management, acute care under test-to-treat protocols, oral contraceptives, and substance use disorder prevention) beyond dispensing medications. Alternatively, medication access programs can target individuals in those areas to deliver medications.56 Additional policy that could incentivize building brick-and-mortar pharmacies in underserved areas could be: providing financial incentives in the form of tax credits, subsidies, low-interest loans, or grants; simplifying the process to open a new pharmacy, such as reducing wait times and bureaucracy to obtain the necessary insurance contracts; allowing pharmacists to co-locate with other healthcare facilities or providers to share space and resources, thus lowering costs; or establish public-private partnerships with health systems or universities to build pharmacies in underserved areas. With regard to operating a pharmacy, continuing to push for PBM reform to promote adequate reimbursement for pharmacies would contribute to improve their financial viability and operational sustainability. Further, reinforcing the role of pharmacists as public health agents to underserved communities could increase the demand for pharmacy services in those areas.
Access to pharmacies, or lack thereof, may have direct consequences for Virginians living in pharmacy deserts, and particularly those with low socioeconomic status. For example, an analysis of pharmacy closures in Los Angeles found that patients experienced a clinically significant decline in adherence to their medications after their local pharmacy closed.25 The effects of low pharmacy access may be compounded by socioeconomic status, as it is well established that lower socioeconomic status is consistently associated with higher rates of adverse health outcomes.57,58 Thus, access should be improved to promote health equity in this population. Of note, the impact of the upcoming 3 large pharmacy chain closures16, 17, 18 on the number of pharmacy deserts and on patient outcomes is yet to be determined.
There are several limitations to this analysis. First, there remains no one precise definition of a pharmacy desert, as noted by other scholars.26,28 Different analyses have utilized different definitions of pharmacy desert, for example, using different distance thresholds to measure access, or even omitting the low-income component entirely.14,35,59,60 However, we used a definition that has been adopted in a large, national analysis28 that incorporates income and access components, providing a more comprehensive view of the true proximity of pharmacies to residents. Future research should consider definitions that maximally incorporate relevant income- and access-related factors. Despite this, other areas of the Commonwealth may also benefit from a pharmacy even though they did not meet the pharmacy desert criteria of this study. Second, we used a conceptually simple measure—geographic straight-line distance—to proxy for access in defining deserts. It is possible to define access in other ways; for example, a previous analysis used travel time to identify deserts in 4 large U.S. cities and adopted a 15 minute cutoff, similar to what the Department of Agriculture uses to define food deserts.61 However, using travel time to measure access comes with its own set of uncertainties and choices, including the appropriate transportation choice (e.g., private vehicle, public transportation, walking), how to incorporate factors including traffic, and other matters. Third, there is a possibility that identified desert tracts in Virginia had accessible pharmacies in adjacent states (e.g., North Carolina). In these instances, we searched the Internet for the existence of a proximate pharmacy and accounted for that in our analysis. Additionally, none of the tracts where simulated pharmacy locations would provide the greatest reduction in population living in a desert (e.g., Chesapeake city, northern Halifax County) were susceptible to “edge effects” arising from state borders and therefore remain primary candidates for recommendations for additional pharmacy service points. Fourth, the classification of independent vs. chain community pharmacies was based on the Board of Pharmacy appraisal during inspection and not obtained through direct report from the pharmacy owners. Nevertheless, we expect this determination to be fairly accurate. Finally, we cannot rule out that individuals might still have access to their medications via mail order pharmacy.
Despite these limitations, our study has several strengths. Though not the first to examine pharmacy deserts in Virginia,62 our study stands out for using an up-to-date and accurate database of pharmacies operating in Virginia from the Board of Pharmacy. This database reflected recent pharmacy closures occurring within the Commonwealth and was not susceptible to issues such as data quality errors arising from third-party data sources. Further, the variables and thresholds used to define pharmacy deserts were based on the relevant literature and empirical studies26,35, 36, 37 rather than relying on arbitrary cutoffs (<10, 10–20, 20–30, >30 min travel time) to define accessibility.62 Additionally, our study identified specific geographical locations that should be targeted as a means to increase access to pharmacies. Despite these differences, our results validate the conclusions from the previous analysis of a lower pharmacy density in western and southern Virginia, a lower pharmacy density in areas with high proportion of Black residents in the Virginia Beach metropolitan area, and emphasize the need for additional pharmacy service points in rural and economically underserved areas.62
In conclusion, we identified 51 primarily urban census tracts in Virginia that were considered pharmacy deserts, using an up-to-date and accurate database of pharmacy permits. Compared to nondeserts, pharmacy desert tracts were associated with a lower percentage of residents below 18 year-old, greater percentage of Black residents, uninsured or with public insurance, lower median household income, greater percentage of residents living in poverty, and greater values of ADI and SVI, highlighting disparities in pharmacy access. Forty-four locations were identified using geospatial simulation where placement of pharmacy services could benefit the largest number of residents living in desert tracts.
Disclosure
The authors declare no relevant conflicts of interest or financial relationships.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Virginia Board of Pharmacy staff who helped compile the pharmacy permits data that were used in this analysis, namely: Beth O'Halloran, RPh; Ellen Shinaberry, PharmD; Ryan Logan, RPh; and Ashley Carter, MPH.