Abstract
Despite planners' claims of positive health impacts from climate action, practical implementation of climate-adaptive planning is not understood as planning for health. Exploring the relationship between urban greening, climate adaptation, and health equity planning, we take a critical lens to climate plans and public health plans from five cities at the forefront of greening for climate adaptation. We propose a fine-grained analytical framework for urban health equity practices by adding ‘foundational’ justice (epistemic, testimonial, hermeneutical) to Schlosberg's traditional justice framework (recognitional, distributive, procedural). Our analysis revealed three main patterns within greening initiatives for climate: Neglecting; Omitting; and Aspiring. Neglecting cities (Amsterdam/Bristol) did not focus their climate or health plans on justice concepts. They described specialized governance without intersectional approaches. Omitting cities (Montréal/Toulouse) lightly applied equity terms with interest in just outcomes. However, their strategies omitted how their policies might support historically marginalized groups. Aspiring cities (Portland) incorporated justice concepts into their planning and sought partnerships from various sectors/experiences. Aspiring cities demonstrated an attempt to redress health inequities by targeting pathways of socio-structural disparities. How these cities integrated traditional justice concepts in their plans revealed that the ‘foundational’ justice dimensions are necessary to engage with and apply ‘traditional’ justice concepts.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Climate adaptation Green infrastructure Health equity Environmental justice Climate change Cities
1. Introduction
The urgency of climate change has spurred numerous green interventions to reduce urban climate vulnerability while addressing health threats. Indeed, research continues to report the repercussions of climate change on human health (Luber & Prudent, 2009; McMichael et al., 2006) while documenting the benefits of urban greening (e.g., tree canopy and parks), for climate adaptation (Meerow & Newell, 2017) and health (Markevych et al., 2017; Triguero-Mas et al., 2015). However, recent analyses challenge the notion that greening for climate adaptation is purely a win-win solution. For example, the neglect of historical socio-economic and political injustices (enduring segregation, disinvestment in historically marginalized neighborhoods, or gentrification) remains overlooked in greening and other climate-adaptive infrastructure (Anguelovski, Cole, et al., 2018). This disregard risks exacerbating social inequities and transferring environmental and health risks from one community to another (Keenan et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2016). As urban planning directly influences the built environment, and the built environment is a social determinant of health (Krieger et al., 2020; Lovasi et al., 2009; Mouratidis, 2021; Singh et al., 2017; Wilson et al., 2008), this transfer of risks and burdens threaten regional climate resilience efforts.
One aim of climate responses is to address the environmental and health impacts caused by extreme weather events such as heat-related illness by addressing urban heat islands (Harlan et al., 2007; Li et al., 2022; Schmeltz et al., 2016), vector-borne illness from flooding, and respiratory illness from poor air quality (Fuller et al., 2022; Perera, 2018). While climate has a significant impact on health, the practical implementation of climate planning is not commonly seen as planning for health. This lack of integration between urban planning for climate change and public health contributes to weak and unevaluated health benefits, which lead to uneven health outcomes and negative health consequences arising from such climate developments for certain social groups (Corburn, 2009; Kotsila & Anguelovski, 2023; Williams et al., 2022).
A commonly employed urban greening approach to achieve climate resilience, is through green infrastructure (sometimes referred to as green resilient infrastructure), which is equally touted by planners for its benefits to community well-being (Dadvand et al., 2016; Markevych et al., 2017; Nieuwenhuijsen, 2021; Van den Berg et al., 2010). However, despite claims toward improved or protected health “for all,” there is growing evidence of physical displacement and exclusion of historically marginalized communities from neighborhoods with green resilient infrastructures (e.g., heat-mitigating parks and bioswales) (Anguelovski et al., 2022; Nesbitt et al., 2019; Quinton et al., 2022; Rigolon & Collins, 2023). Moreover, there remains a paucity of information on the health equity impacts of planning for and implementing these green infrastructures (Bowen & Lynch, 2017; Cole et al., 2019; Triguero-Mas et al., 2021). There is also little evidence on how conventional forms of elite-centered governance for climate change may reinforce existing power and privilege, thereby (re)producing environmental injustices and health inequities (Thurlow & Jaworski, 2017). Thus, how and the extent to which historically marginalized residents might benefit or be excluded from healthy, green, climate-adaptive neighborhoods (i.e., the environmental justice considerations) remains poorly understood.
From the premise that health equity in climate adaptation planning will help achieve environmental justice, this study aims to better understand the relationship between urban greening, climate adaptation planning, and health equity planning by critically examining urban climate plans and public health plans from five cities that are at the forefront of greening for climate adaptation and climate resilience (Amsterdam, Bristol, Montréal, Toulouse, and Portland). Building on the traditional tripartite framework for social equity used in environmental justice frameworks (Schlosberg, 2007) in complement with ‘foundational’ justice principles, we construct a unique fine-grained justice-centered analytical framework to ask: how do city departments address and operationalize health equity and justice principles in their climate-resilient greening practices and what are the implications for a more just climate-responsive public action?
2. Planning for equitable urban health in the context of climate change
2.1. Urban planning and public health from the 19th century
By the 21st century, urban planning and public health had evolved into such separate and distinct disciplines that their shared origin and history have been disregarded in each field's respective discourse and practice (Corburn, 2004). Consequently, their disconnection no longer effectively addresses the relationship between the built environment and health that initially gave rise to both fields (Corburn, 2007; Duhl & Sanchez, 1999). In the early 19th century, the disciplines of urban planning and public health had not yet been defined as separate fields. Rather, the practices associated with these fields originated from the necessity to address emerging health risks brought about by industrialization and rapid urbanization (Corburn, 2004). These risks encompassed issues such as unsanitary conditions, elevated pollution levels, and inadequate housing for the urban poor (Kenzer, 2000). However, with the traction of the germ theory of disease in the mid-to-late 19th century, which demonstrated that pathogens cause disease, public health practitioners shifted to the clinic and partnered with physicians (Corburn, 2004). Meanwhile, the planning field was captured by the Haussman model of zoning, which demolished and restructured cities by “immunizing” communities from the unhealthy harms of industry and by segregating middle-class bourgeois residents from the urban poor (Corburn, 2004; Popper, 1981). By the 1950s–60s, public health had lost its focus on the social dimensions of disease and instead targeted newly discovered biomedical interventions, shifting the onus of illness to individual behaviors and “risk factors” (Solar & Irwin, 2010; Susser & Susser, 1996). Planning in the mid-20th century was primarily concerned with economic development and efficiency and ignored urbanization's harmful “spillovers,” such as adverse health effects from landfills and pollution (Fishman, 1982, Fishman, 2000).
This division raises concern about the ability of cities to respond to the many complex issues that impact public urban systems. This is particularly true for addressing health equity. Although criticized for being exclusionary of people living with chronic disease and people of older age (Huber et al., 2011; Leonardi, 2018), health is defined by the World Health Organization as “a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity” (World Health Organization, 1946). Meanwhile, health equity is considered social justice in health, meaning “no one is denied the possibility to be healthy for belonging to a group that has historically been economically/socially disadvantaged” (Arcaya et al., 2015; Braveman, 2014; Braveman & Gruskin, 2003). This includes access to resources required to be healthy, such as the nonmedical factors that influence health outcomes (or social determinants of health). While health inequalities are differences in health status between population groups (e.g., health differences between age groups), health inequities are health differences that are unnecessary, avoidable, and unjust (Braveman & Gruskin, 2003). Thus, the implications for health inequity in climate change include unequal climate exposure and impacts on health suffered by socioeconomic and racialized groups pushed to the bottom of social hierarchies (Friel et al., 2011; Morello-Frosch & Obasogie, 2023; Smith et al., 2022; White-Newsome et al., 2018). For example, predominantly Black neighborhoods have been historically disinvested, have fewer protections from heat, and are more prone to urban heat islands, therefore suffering a disproportionate amount of heat-related illness and death (Kovats & Hajat, 2008; Smith et al., 2022; Wilson, 2020).
Despite the marked separation in the fields of urban planning and public health, increased calls for their convergence have been made since the late 20th and early 21st century (Corburn, 2004; Krieger, 2001). Such efforts include the field of social epidemiology and ecosocial theory (Krieger, 2014) and the emphasis on the built environment as a social determinant of health (Krieger et al., 2020; Lovasi et al., 2009; Mouratidis, 2021; Singh et al., 2017; Wilson et al., 2008). In this paper, we recognize and build on the fact that the urban planning scholarly and practice communities have increasingly brought in health (equity) in their research and objectives over the last decade, such as the adoption of the healthy cities approach (Barton & Grant, 2013; Corburn, 2009; Duhl & Sanchez, 1999; Kenzer, 2000). Consequently, there is an urgent need to bring together urban planning and public health to effectively address the complex and interrelated issues posed by climate change on urban systems and avoid unintended consequences of health and climate on historically marginalized social groups.
2.2. Urban greening for climate resilience and health
Urban greening has thus become a central tool for urban planners and public health practitioners to address both climate and health challenges together. As of June 2022, more than 2100 cities and towns have declared a Climate Emergency, and more than 700 cities are part of the 2020 Race to Zero global campaign,1 with many urban climate planning interventions centering on natural systems, such as green infrastructure to adapt to and mitigate the impacts of climate change (Dorst et al., 2019; Frantzeskaki et al., 2017; McPhearson et al., 2015). Typical examples of urban greening include parks, tree canopies, and rain gardens (Shokry et al., 2020). These forms of urban greening have also been justified to benefit physical and mental health (Kabisch et al., 2017; Markevych et al., 2017; Panno et al., 2017; Van den Berg et al., 2010). Some positive physical benefits of green infrastructure include cardiovascular, cardiometabolic, and respiratory health (Cavaleiro Rufo et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020; Lane et al., 2017). Meanwhile, green infrastructure has also been positively correlated with self-perceived health (Dadvand et al., 2016), psychological well-being (Markevych et al., 2017; Triguero-Mas et al., 2015), and cognitive development in children (Amoly et al., 2014; Flax et al., 2020). Greening is also framed within a broader climate resilience discourse for its more comprehensive social and ecological benefits for its urban residents (Anguelovski et al., 2020). Specifically, urban greening is heralded to improve social engagement and cohesion by creating public spaces for positive social interactions (Jennings & Bamkole, 2019). Additionally, the ecological benefits of green infrastructure include carbon sequestration, removal of air pollutants (Baró et al., 2014), natural stormwater management, flood mitigation (Gómez-Baggethun & Barton, 2013; Liu & Jensen, 2018), and protection against urban heat islands (Shishegar, 2014). Altogether, these social and ecological outcomes promote urban greening as an excellent candidate for climate adaptation and resilience.
Moving from Holling's (1973) original conceptualization of social-ecological resilience as a dynamic and non-static ecosystem that can persist through disturbances, today's urban climate resilience is often linked to the ability to “bounce back” from climate disruptions (Meerow et al., 2016; Meerow & Stults, 2016). However, the idea of ‘bouncing back’ to the original state has been criticized for maintaining the status quo when applied to social systems and limiting progressive transformations (MacKinnon & Derickson, 2013; Meerow & Newell, 2017; Meerow & Stults, 2016). Though resilience theory is often commended for connecting social and ecological systems, a common critique of urban planning – and green infrastructure in particular – for climate resilience is that it fails to address equity issues (Anguelovski, Cole, et al., 2018; Garcia-Lamarca et al., 2021; Shokry et al., 2020; Vale, 2014). Many urban greening projects for climate adaptation have indeed been shown to contribute to urban inequities through concurrent processes of green devaluation, rent gap, and new value creation (Dillon, 2014); green dispossession and accumulation (Safransky, 2014); green exclusion and privilege (Anguelovski et al., 2019; Haase et al., 2017); and green gentrification and displacement (Anguelovski et al., 2022; Immergluck & Balan, 2018; Keenan et al., 2018; Pearsall & Anguelovski, 2016) — all of which are recent manifestations of environmental injustices. Thus, urban greening for climate adaptation might further marginalize working-class and racialized residents and contribute to their climate and health vulnerability.
2.3. Examining social equity in the context of planning for climate and health
Despite calls for placing equity at the center of climate adaptation planning (Anguelovski, 2016; Pörtner et al., 2022), social equity remains secondary, de-prioritized, or limited in scope or practice in climate plans and their green infrastructure initiatives (Chu & Cannon, 2021; Fiack et al., 2021; Meerow et al., 2019). Further, the limited understanding of health equity is exemplified by the distinction between biophysical vulnerabilities and socio-structural vulnerabilities in planning for climate impacts. Biophysical vulnerabilities to climate change include individuals with congenital and chronic illness, those at very young and older ages, and people with injuries. Meanwhile, socio-structural vulnerabilities are the societal and structural conditions of marginalization (e.g., racism and classism) that impose vulnerability to climate impacts and poorer health outcomes. The existent inequities in climate vulnerability and adverse health outcomes from climate impacts necessitate a more critical environmental justice approach by which both biophysical and socio-structural vulnerabilities to climate change can be addressed.
Much of the literature on environmental justice has traditionally adopted the tripartite framework of social equity (referred to as the “traditional justice” framework) posited by Schlosberg (2007) to critically assess the social justice ramifications of urban planning, especially environmental projects like green infrastructure. Although Schlosberg expanded the justice conversation beyond distributional justice by adding recognitional justice in the “diversity of the participants and experiences in affected communities” and procedural justice in the “political processes which create and manage environmental policy” (Schlosberg, 2004, Schlosberg, 2007), a more recent thread in the literature on environmental justice examines the limitations of this tripartite approach. Such limitations include the restrictive nature of the tripartite framework to center (un)just conditions as experienced by urban residents and communities (Agyeman & Evans, 2004; Anguelovski et al., 2020; Pearsall & Anguelovski, 2016; Ranganathan & Bratman, 2021) and its inability to evaluate “the informal, invisibilized, and displaced spaces and spatial practices that are becoming activated, deactivated, or, in contrast, untouched or undisclosed in the process [of green transformation]” (Anguelovski et al., 2020). This recent thread of literature provides a nuanced understanding of environmental justice, focusing on more intersectional manifestations of injustice (Alvarez & Evans, 2021; Kotsila & Anguelovski, 2023; Williams et al., 2022) and “intersectional drivers of precarity and trauma” (Ranganathan & Bratman, 2021) that have compounded over the last decade for people of color, low-income, and immigrant communities in today's cities (Cho et al., 2013; Goodling, 2020; McKane et al., 2018).
In response, scholars in the fields of geography, environmental studies, urban planning, gender studies, and public health who focus on climate change have advocated for intersectional environmental justice frameworks. These calls seek frameworks that examine the knowledge, practices, and testimonies that are given importance and legitimacy within and outside of the ‘traditional’ justice framework (Bauriedl, 2021; Derman, 2022; Mabon et al., 2022; McArdle, 2021; Osborne, 2015; Smith, 2016), incorporate intersectional approaches, (Amorim-Maia et al., 2022; Buse & Patrick, 2020; de Onís, 2012; Malin & Ryder, 2018; Mikulewicz et al., 2023; Perkins, 2018; Williams et al., 2022), and follow abolitionist and anti-subordination greening practices (Anguelovski et al., 2020; Ranganathan & Bratman, 2021) as fundamental to justice in health and climate. As a result, epistemic justice and its related testimonial and hermeneutical justice (referred to as the three “foundational justice” dimensions from now onwards) are considered integral to a more comprehensive and holistic justice framework.
For example, epistemic justice posits that all ‘knowers’ of a topic or situation are engaged in the decision-making (Catala, 2015; Fricker, 2003, Fricker, 2007). Epistemic justice does not hierarchize and prioritize any form of knowledge and can thus be used to uncover prejudice against certain ‘knowers’ because of their race, social background etc. (Byskov, 2021; Dieleman, 2015). Epistemic injustice can also be found in epistemic hierarchies between sectors that limit intersectional collaboration (Anderson, 2012; Carel & Kidd, 2021). One such branch of epistemic justice is that of testimonial justice, which views all ‘knowers’ as credible sources without privileging one social position over the other (Davis, 2016; Dieleman, 2015; Fricker, 2007). Ultimately, testimonial justice validates experiential knowledge and elevates all forms of expertise in decision-making without prejudice toward the ‘knower’ or tokenization (Davis, 2016). More plainly, testimonial justice places value on hearing the lived experiences of those most impacted or most affected by certain policies and strategies. As such, who is validated when sharing their knowledge (testimonial justice) determines what is reflected in the broader collective pool of expertise (Fricker, 2013; Temper & Del Bene, 2016). In turn, what is considered ‘expert knowledge’ then shapes how different ‘knowers’ understand and “make sense of” a topic or situation, highlighting another branch of epistemic justice, called hermeneutical justice (Fricker, 2007; Goetze, 2018). That is, hermeneutical justice is reflected in how an issue or problem is framed, who sets the agenda about how to address the situation, and the (systemic and relational) support different ‘knowers’ receive to be versed and immersed in the epistemic hegemony (Fricker, 2013; Medina, 2012). Hermeneutical justice can translate to forms of empowerment where people have the tools, skills, and insights to engage in decision-making processes and shape urban planning and policy (Anderson, 2012; Goetze, 2018).
We have termed epistemic, testimonial, and hermeneutical justice as “foundational justice” dimensions because we argue that they establish a foundational comprehension for effectively operationalizing Schlosberg's traditionally employed social justice concepts or “traditional justice” framework. Specifically, epistemic and testimonial justice shed light on the unconscious biases among planners and the documents they enact that eventually hinder the true realization of recognitional and distributional justice (Chu & Michael, 2019; Lajoie-O'Malley et al., 2023; Mabon et al., 2022). Similarly, hermeneutical justice acknowledges the prevailing status quo and unquestioned processes that limit genuine procedural justice (Anguelovski et al., 2020; Osborne, 2015). By critically examining approaches used in practice by planners and their interpretive frameworks, hermeneutical justice promotes inclusivity and challenges oppressive interpretations. These ‘foundational’ justice components are thus intricately intertwined with the understanding and practice of Schlosberg's ‘traditional’ justice framework. This paper examines these relationships with a focus on the context in which ‘traditional’ justice components are planned, particularly to identify more holistic justice approaches to planning for climate change and public health, and to achieve more equitable health benefits and outcomes of climate adaptation measures (e.g., green infrastructure).
Building on these bodies of literature and the need to critically assess the health equity implications of planning for green cities, this paper asks: How and to what extent do a variety of cities at the forefront of greening for climate adaptation account for justice and unintended health consequences (that lead to health inequities) in their climate-adaptive green infrastructure plans? The three ‘foundational’ justice principles used in our analysis reflect important justice considerations, particularly for recognitional and procedural justice, and reframe how procedural justice is employed beyond the checkbox of public participation. Thus, we posit that using these ‘foundational’ justice principles supports critical research on urban environmental justice by identifying the key concepts and practices that directly influence the operationalization of the three traditional justice principles, particularly as they relate to the process of responding to climate change in urban planning and public health.
3. Methods
3.1. Study context
Our study examines selected cities in Canada, the United States, and Western Europe. Building on the identification of 99 cities included in a large European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant GreenLULUs (2016-2021) (referred to as the “parent project” from now onwards) and our review of policy literature and media reports on these cities, we identified five mid-sized cities with (a) a demonstrated commitment to climate action, (b) a history of implementing green infrastructure, and (c) a diverse approach to health (equity) and procedural participation (Amsterdam, Bristol, Montréal, Toulouse, and Portland). These five cases were selected to present a robust and reliable multiple-case study (Baxter & Jack, 2015; Yin, 2018) to understand how and to what extent city departments operationalize health equity and justice principles in climate-resilient greening from diverse social, political, and environmental contexts. Our selection of five case studies reflects the complexity and interrelations between urban greening, climate adaptation, and health equity planning within diverse Global North regions and historical planning practices from the parent project.
We present the five case studies in this study (Table 1) based on triangulated information extracted from grey literature and the parent project database, which provided a summary of 50 greening trajectories from mid-sized cities (Anguelovski, Argüelles, et al., 2018) and qualitative interview data from cities identified as experiencing green gentrification. As such, the selected cities in this study have all implemented past and ongoing green infrastructure initiatives as part of their climate adaptation strategies. Furthermore, these selected case studies all ranked high for their use of ‘green rhetoric’ or the extent to which “greening is a vital component of their brand and their idealised future state” (Anguelovski, Argüelles, et al., 2018). The dependent variables of ‘physical implementation’ and ‘green rhetoric’ left 32 eligible cities. From these high-ranked ‘green rhetoric’ cities, we selected cities with distinct and dissimilar levels of ‘health focus’ and ‘procedural participation’ to understand the independent variables of health equity integration and procedural justice consideration, leaving 23 eligible cities. We then filtered our inclusion of case studies based on the first author's fluency in the languages of the plans with native or bilingual proficiency, leaving 16 eligible cities. We then segmented these cities by geographical location and whether they were recognized as leading green cities in their respective countries identified by Green Capital Awards in Europe and news media, leaving 8 eligible cities. Our final selection of the five cities was made after a preliminary review of the city's respective climate adaptation plans and health plans for varied discussions on health equity and procedural participation.
Table 1. Summary of green rhetoric and health emphasis for the five cities.

Empty Cell	Green rhetoric	Health emphasis
Amsterdam	Green metropole, green agenda: green space at a maximum 10-minute walk	Quality of life through air quality and clean soil and water
Bristol	European Green Capital 2015 and most sustainable city (2008 Forum of the Future)	Healthy environment, health inequalities in inner city, local food production
Montréal	Park network, éco-quartier, ruelles vertes (eco-neighborhoods, green alleys)	Healthy sustainable neighborhoods, counter heat island effect, urban gardening
Toulouse	Zones vertes, coulées vertes (green zones, green pathways) and nature narrative	Quality of life, healthy city, integrate nature, sports, & leisure, city-owned organic farm
Portland	Green “Walking City,” green economy agenda, greenway/esplanade, green streets	Expanded tree canopy for heat, opportunities for physical activity: trails, biking, & canoeing
Data source: Omitted for anonymity purposes.

Each case reflects distinct urban planning and public health traditions, shaped by unique social and environmental histories of their respective regions. The national and regional difference continue to influence the present realities in each city. For instance, the United States' ongoing discussions on (environmental) racism place race issues at the forefront of many political decisions (Bullard, 2018; Kaufman & Hajat, 2021; Njoku, 2021; Williams, 2018). Histories of Indigenous colonization and enslavement of African people in North American colonies (the US and Canada) might influence the extent to which ancestors of colonizers and enslavers in North America are confronted with their ancestors' legacies (Lansing & Leeson, 2012; Rutty & Sullivan, 2010). In contrast, European countries (Great Britain, France, and the Netherlands) seem to overlook the racial impacts of their colonizing legacies. Today, there remain imbalances of power and ultimately, racism and xenophobia toward immigrants from former colonies living in respective European “homelands” (e.g., Indian immigrants in Great Britain, Senegalese immigrants in France). However, European cities often consider class in political discourse (Kronsell, 2005; Navarro, 2007) and appear to have stronger class awareness within public health (e.g., Poor Laws in England (1834) and Amsterdam (1912)) in comparison to North America (Evans, 2018; Gosling, 2017; Navarro, 1990; Strik & Knols, 1996).
3.2. Data collection
We identified each city's latest climate plan and public health plan from municipal government websites between July and August 2021. We used climate plans as they are typically the instrument by which urban green infrastructure for climate resilience is included. Meanwhile, each city's public health plan was collected either by municipal or regional government websites, depending on the area's public health body and selected the available public health plan most closely related to climate change. We used public health plans as they are commonly the vehicles through which health equity is acknowledged and pursued. Though each city had a climate plan, the exact focus of the public health plans in each city varied. Specifically, at the time of data collection, only one city had a health plan focused on climate (Portland), two cities had health plans on environmental health issues (Montréal and Toulouse), and two cities had general health plans with mentions of the environment (Amsterdam and Bristol).
The climate plans varied greatly in length, detail, and depth, from fewer than 51 pages (Amsterdam) to more than 171 pages (Toulouse). Similarly, health plans ranged from fewer than 16 pages (Amsterdam) to more than 111 pages (Montréal) (Table 2).
Table 2. Climate and public health plans analyzed in this study.

Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Amsterdam	Bristol	Montréal	Portland	Toulouse
Climate plan	Title, (year)	Strategy for Climate Adaptation, (2020)	One City Climate Strategy 2020–2030, (2020)	Climate Plan 2020–2030, (2020)	2015 Climate Action Plan: Final Progress Report, (2020)	Territorial Climate Air and Energy Plan: The New Action Program 2018–2023, (2018)
Internal acronym	AMS SCA	BRS OCCS	MTL CP	PDX CAP: FPR	TLS TCAEP
Publishing agency	City of Amsterdam, Office of Public Spaces and Green Areas	City of Bristol, Office of One City Environmental Sustainability Board	City of Montréal, Bureau of Ecological Transition and Resilience	Multnomah County, Office of Sustainability and the City of Portland, Bureau of Planning and Sustainability	Toulouse Metropole, Office of Environment
Health plan	Title, (year)	Public Health Note Amsterdam 2017–2020, (2017)	Addressing the Health & Wellbeing Gap, (2017)	Extreme and Severe Heat Plan, (2019)	Climate Change & Public Health Preparation Plan, (2013)	3rd Regional Plan on Health and the Environment Occitan 2017–2021, (2018)
Internal acronym	AMS PHN	BRS HWG	MTL ESHP	PDX CCPH	TLS RPHE
Publishing agency	City of Amsterdam, Municipal Health Service (GGD)	NHS Bristol, North Somerset, and South Gloucestershire	CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-de-l'Île-de-Montréal, Regional Public Health Directorate	Multnomah County, Health Department	Occitan Regional Health Agency
3.3. Analysis
For each city, we analyzed climate plans and public health plans to identify official visions and framings at the intersection of climate planning and health equity, on the one hand, and climate change and justice, on the other. Our coding was specifically geared to the green infrastructure included in each plan. The coding of non-English language plans (French) and translation of French excerpts from these plans were completed by the first author (bilingual proficiency) and verified by the second author, a native French speaker.
We used a deductive coding approach based on thematic coding methods to dissect how each plan: (i) defined and understood social equity within climate adaptation for (equitable) health outcomes; (ii) integrated and considered unjust climate impacts and health inequities; (iii) described and justified the interrelation between climate and health equity; and (iv) engaged in intersectional collaborations with (public health) partners for climate-adaptive greening.
To code for how plans defined and understood social equity, we examined how fairness was described either through terminology and concepts of equality or equity. We then developed a set of deductive codes (Table 3) derived from the literature on the ‘traditional’ justice framework (see Section 2.3 — Literature review) to dissect and capture the extent to which these plans integrated and considered unjust climate impacts and health inequities. Specifically, we created codes focused on recognitional justice (recognition of climate impact and health outcome inequities and discussion of structural oppression), distributive justice (consideration of social factors in allocating resources and in the distribution of benefits/harms), and procedural justice (inclusive participation and engagement with explicit reference to which community groups and members are engaged). The main themes that were identified from the ‘traditional’ justice codes were then re-coded with foundational justice codes (Table 4) to provide clarity on the success or limitations of plans to integrate the ‘traditional’ framework: epistemic justice (discussions on history, context, and areas of knowledge), testimonial justice (mentions of authority or expertise), and hermeneutical justice (redressing imbalances of capacity and power).
Table 3. Traditional justice framework coding scheme for recognitional, distributional, and procedural justice.

Coding category	Description
Framing of equity or equality	Text defining equity or equality for the city
Recognitional justice	
 Addressing the needs, identities, and specific epistemologies of climate-vulnerable groups	Text identifying climate-vulnerable populations or describing inequities in vulnerability to climate
 Discussion of structural oppression and legacy of segregation, racism, discrimination, etc.	Text recognizing the existence of structural oppression, including structural racism, or their impacts
Distributional justice	
 Equity of resource allocations	Text describing how resources are inequitably distributed across the city or strategies to enhance equity of resource allocation, including environmental resources and land
 Consideration of the distribution of benefits or unintended harms/consequences	Text describing how planned actions expect to distribute climate and health benefits or may exacerbate or create new harm in certain neighborhoods/areas or strategies to avoid these potential harms
Procedural justice	
 Inclusive participation and engagement and other forms of institutional arrangements that incorporate the priorities of historically marginalized groups	Text describing how historically marginalized groups are engaged in or participate the planning process or initiatives to increase participation in decision-making
Table 4. Foundational justice dimensions coding scheme for epistemic, testimonial, and hermeneutical justice.

Coding category	Description
Epistemic justice	
 Consideration of historical narrative	Text describing the history of how the current climate/public health situation has developed
 Consideration of contextual narrative	Text describing the context for how the current climate/public health situation persists
 Consideration of prejudice	Text describing how the actions and behaviors of historically marginalized groups are understood or perceived
 Consideration of other areas of knowledge	Text describing how the knowledge of other, often non expert, sectors/disciplines and historically marginalized groups are understood or perceived
Testimonial justice	
 Addressing issues of expertise	Text identifying which identities are experts or describing expertise
 Addressing issues of hierarchy in community group types or positions	Text identifying which community groups or positions are invited to engage or describing a hierarchy in community group type or position
 Addressing issues of sectoral authority	Text identifying which sectors have authority to contribute or describing sectoral authority over an area of focus
Hermeneutical justice	
 Addressing imbalances of socio-cultural hegemony	Text describing how historically marginalized groups are at a disadvantage in language and decorum for public meetings or strategies to provide [care] throughout engagement processes
 Addressing imbalances in institutional and/or academic knowledge	Text describing how historically marginalized groups are at a disadvantage in planning methods and processes or strategies to brief and inform on planning processes
 Addressing imbalances of capacity	Text describing how historically marginalized groups are at a disadvantage in their capacity to engage or strategies to support community capacity (compensation, resources, support staff)
 Addressing imbalances of decision-making power	Text describing how historically marginalized groups are at a disadvantage in decision-making power or strategies to transfer decision-making power to historically marginalized groups
Additionally, to code for how plans described and justified the interrelation of climate adaptation and health equity (e.g., climate-adaptive greening for the health of all social groups) and engaged in intersectional collaborations to achieve these outcomes, we developed a set of codes to assess how climate and health equity themes are interrelated in their planning contexts (such as how health equity is framed within climate plans and how equitable climate resilience is framed within health plans) and how plans engaged with diverse collaboration approaches (such as intersectoral and multidisciplinary partnerships) (Table 5). We then thoroughly assessed and coded the plans according to this second scheme.
Table 5. Coding scheme for diverse collaboration approaches and intersectional collaborations.

Coding category	Description
Interrelation of climate and health
Framing of climate concerning health equity	Text describing the relationship between climate impacts and public health outcomes or harms, particularly between social groups.
Framing of climate adaptation concerning public health (equity) pathways	Text describing the relationship between climate adaptation strategies and public health outcomes or benefits, particularly for historically marginalized groups.

Intersectional collaborations
Intersectoral partnerships	Text describing how the municipality plans to partner with internal partners in other sectors or departments
Multidisciplinary partnerships, including environment and climate, green infrastructure, housing, and health	Text describing how the municipality plans to partner with external partners in other disciplines
We then pulled our analysis together to identify patterns between cities, which led us to group cities by three major indicators: (i) stated positions on (social and health) inequity and fairness; (ii) assumed roles and responsibilities (including public participation) of the city for unjust climate impacts and health inequities; and (iii) described approaches to intersectional, multidisciplinary collaboration.
4. Results
Our analysis revealed three main patterns regarding justice and health within climate-adaptive green infrastructure: Neglecting, Omitting, and Aspiring. We find that Neglecting cities (Amsterdam & Bristol) do not focus their climate adaptation plans and health plans on equity nor employ justice concepts. Instead, they describe highly specialized governance with minimal multidisciplinary or intersectional approaches and share negligible public engagement practices. Omitting cities (Montréal & Toulouse) lightly applied (social) equity terminology with a stated interest in just outcomes and integrated steps toward intersectional collaboration. However, they do not provide an understanding of how their policies might contribute to or mitigate unintended consequences, such as harmful health outcomes for historically marginalized groups, or the urban fabric, such as green gentrification. Lastly, Aspiring cities (Portland) incorporate justice concepts into their planning frameworks and seek the support and expertise of multiple disciplines, various sectors, and the lived experience of residents most harmed by prior urban policy and governance. Aspiring cities demonstrate an attempt to redress social and health inequalities by targeting pathways of social structural disparities in the climate and health plans (Table 6).
Table 6. Summary of the main justice patterns revealed in the reviewed climate-resilient green infrastructure plans of Amsterdam, Bristol, Montréal, Toulouse, and Portland's climate and public health plans.

Indicators	Trend 1: Neglecting	Trend 2: Omitting	Trend 3: Aspiring
Position on (social and health) (in)equity & fairness	Equality focused: Acknowledge the existence of social and health inequalities in climate impacts but leave them unaddressed in plans.

Moral order (“status quo”) position of fairness as equality.	Equity aware: Problematize social and health inequalities by prioritizing biophysical vulnerability to climate impacts.

Cherry-picking position of fairness to support biophysical vulnerabilities.	Equity seeking: Attempt to redress social and health inequities by targeting pathways of systemic and structural inequities in climate adaptation.

Progressive position of fairness as social structural equity.
City responsibility (incl. public participation) for unjust climate impacts & health inequities	The city implicitly assigns the responsibility of climate action to the community; the responsibility of change is placed on individuals.

Public participation is to inform and educate residents on climate impacts and to extract information for the city's climate approaches.	The city takes primary responsibility for climate action while relying on mobilized residents (privileged volunteers) to advance change.

Public participation is to share the city's agenda for climate planning and promote the residents and groups that support it.	The city assumes institutional responsibility for climate action, shifting governance structures to advance change.

Public participation is to involve the community in steering decision-making processes for climate planning.
Intersectional collaboration approaches	Isolated (specific) questions for expert opinion on the environment or public health	Intersectoral consultation for expert contribution on the environment or public health	Multidisciplinary partnerships for shared policies on the environment and public health
4.1. Pattern 1: neglecting diverse perspectives on climate adaptation justice by an unquestioned moral order
Amsterdam and Bristol's climate plans and health plans do not address social justice and health equity. They use the term “fairness” to imply broad benefits, but fail to account for historically marginalized groups excluded from public benefits. The plans acknowledge vulnerable communities, yet focus on neighborhoods rather than the people in them and ignore underlying systems of oppression and exclusion that have fueled disinvestment in these neighborhoods. Additionally, they fail to describe diverse partnerships that are necessary to achieve the purported health (co)-benefits of the climate plans. Community participation is framed as an individual responsibility, emphasizing institutional norms of engagement and disregarding imbalances of power and privilege in traditional planning spaces. Overall, these plans neglect social justice and health equity, meaningful participation, and intersectional approaches. This, in turn, impacts the ability of these climate plans and health plans to integrate the ‘traditional’ justice concepts. Thus, limiting comprehensive attempts to address systemic issues that support the climate needs and health of historically marginalized groups, ultimately threatening the overall climate resilience and health equity of these communities at-large.
4.1.1. (In)equality-focused planning by maintaining the status quo in progressive governments
Amsterdam and Bristol do not engage with the language of equity or justice but instead use the terminology of fairness, inequality, and sentiments of “for all,” alluding to a trickle-down effect of planned strategies to benefit all residents (Wieland et al., 2016). Although Amsterdam and Bristol's intent for benefits for all may be genuine, the assumption that the plan will help all community members erases the experiences of historically marginalized groups currently excluded from many public benefits, a form of recognitional injustice. Amsterdam's climate plan defines the relationship of wealth disparities as a passive act whereby marginalized groups are “left with the short straw” (AMS SCA, p. 42) without discussing the city's responsibility in creating, maintaining, or, in contrast, rectifying these social vulnerabilities.
These failures in recognitional justice contrast with Amsterdam and Bristol's acknowledgment that certain community groups with poorer health outcomes live in more “deprived” areas and are more vulnerable to climate change. For instance, Bristol's climate plan acknowledges the distributional injustices of climate vulnerability: “Populations most at risk [of climate change] are marginalised, disadvantaged and vulnerable...some of our most deprived wards will be the most vulnerable to [its] impacts” (BRS OCCP, p. 8). Bristol's health plan also mentions the prevalence of health problems “disproportionality affect people living in the most deprived areas” (BRS HWG, p. 5). Similarly, Amsterdam's health plan mentions “Adverse social and environmental factors…often converge in certain neighbourhoods.” (AMS PHN, p. 10). However, this deprivation and vulnerability are framed in terms of the neighborhood, instead of the people within these areas. This passivity is further demonstrated by the anonymity of who is most at risk in these areas and posits the relationship of vulnerability to be engendered by the condition of being innately “marginalised, disadvantaged and vulnerable,” rather than discerning the role of systems of oppression and exclusion and unequal urban development trends, among others. Meanwhile, Amsterdam's climate plan acknowledges the disadvantage of certain residents in the city but fails to specify whom: “some people...will be able to [fend for themselves] — others won't” (AMS SCA, p. 9).
As a result, Bristol's climate plan and Amsterdam's health plan focus certain interventions on neighborhoods where vulnerability to climate change is high and where poor health is prevalent, which are often the same neighborhoods. For example, Bristol's climate plan mentions the health benefits of green spaces and notes the lack of green spaces in deprived areas. Bristol's proposed solution is to identify methods to transport community members from one part of the city to the green spaces in another city area. Conversely, Amsterdam's health plan proposes to focus interventions within the neighborhood, rather than moving individuals around the city “The offer is tailored to the neighbourhood” (AMS PHN, p. 11). Additionally, although Bristol's climate plan states that it will develop a governance practice in which “unintended negative consequences are quickly identified and minimised or avoided entirely” (BRS OCCP, p. 21), it does not integrate a systems-thinking approach to the issue nor discuss potential concerns of potential unintended negative consequences, such as green gentrification or interrelate negative health outcomes within broader systems of marginalization.
4.1.2. Siloization of climate and health: epistemic hierarchies of sectoral knowledge
Amsterdam and Bristol's climate plans rationalize green spaces by highlighting the critical health (co-)benefits concerning climate change-related illnesses and beyond. Amsterdam highlights green spaces' cooling abilities and protection capacity from heat-related disease. Meanwhile, Bristol features green spaces as places for relaxation and recreation to benefit people's mental health. “Environmental factors” or “environmental exposure” to unnamed sources is quoted in Amsterdam and Bristol's public health plans as contributors to disease and premature death (AMS PHN, p. 6, BRS HWG p. 71). Amsterdam and Bristol do not focus on green spaces as a public health strategy in the examined public health plans. However, social and environmental factors are regarded as discrete and isolated marginal factors impacting health: “40% for behavioural and lifestyle factors..., 30% genetic, 15% social circumstances, 10% healthcare and 5% environmental exposure” (BRS HWG, p. 71). Additionally, both climate plans compare the green spaces available in “affluent” versus “deprived” areas, which speaks to a wider understanding of the influence of the built environment on health and the existence of uneven green development in the city.
This conceptual separation between social and environmental factors that impact health is also reflected in the lack of intersectional or multidisciplinary partnerships. Neither Amsterdam nor Bristol appears to engage in many collaborative approaches to climate planning, despite calls for more intersectoral partnerships from their governing body's respective health plans (AMS PHN, p. 3; BRS HWG p. 83). Further, in Amsterdam's climate plan, coordination with other departments is cautioned only to occur “where necessary” and does not encourage ongoing partnerships between departments and sectors (AMS SCA, p. 33). Similarly, although Bristol's climate plan states the need to “work together as a city” and “collaborate for health-led” infrastructure, it does not specify an approach to involve multiple disciplines or mention other departments or sectors. Though Bristol's climate plan notes engagement with community projects, like “Healthy Planet Bristol,” there is little information about these projects or their green characteristics beyond their titles. Though these omissions may be unintentional, Bristol's Environmental Sustainability Board communicates that different disciplines, sectors, and groups are meant to collaborate for the board's benefit. This emphasis on limited coordination highlights epistemic injustice, as it restricts the knowledge and expertise that could inform comprehensive climate strategies, contributing to recognitional injustice and procedural injustice as it ignores the impacts and potential spillovers to other fields, such as public health, housing, and transportation, and excludes these fields from the planning process. As such, despite relying on the relationship between health and green spaces as justification for prioritizing specific climate strategies, neither Amsterdam's nor Bristol's climate plans specify how their green infrastructure initiatives intervene in hypothesized pathways to benefit the health “of all,” as they claim. Therefore, Amsterdam and Bristol's climate plans do not include comprehensive strategies to avoid unintended health consequences, promoting the health of some at the expense of others.
4.1.3. Participation as public relations and extractivist skill transfer: a disregard for testimonial and hermeneutical justice
In relation to participation, Bristol frequently uses the term “fair,” defined as “maintaining a democratic mandate” where fairness is based on the established norms and power dynamics of the city administration. Although Bristol's climate plan states the intention for “opportunities for all to participate in the benefits [of change]” (BRS OCCS, p. 2), the plan does not recognize historically marginalized groups in the planning process. It, therefore, does not discuss the mechanisms for how such benefits might reach these unrecognized groups. The emphasis on opportunity, rather than outcome, and the conceptualization of participation as the source of future material benefit places the responsibility on residents to participate to be deemed worthy of receiving public benefits. This represents a significant epistemic injustice. Amsterdam and Bristol further remove the administration's responsibility to redress these systems by placing responsibility on individuals for change and supporting governmental power. Furthermore, Amsterdam and Bristol's climate plans both use similar language of shared responsibility in creating participatory processes: “everyone has a role to play.”
Within this individual-based responsibility, Amsterdam and Bristol do not consider hermeneutical justice or differences in agency and power to enact these roles, nor consider the disparity of who is contributing (the most) to imbalances of privilege. Though Bristol's climate plan mentions a hermeneutical justice intent to “transform the way in which...decisions are made” by “empowering everyone,” the objective of empowering in this passage contrasts academic definitions of empowerment. That is, Bristol wishes to provide “skills, knowledge, and capacity” but frames these skills within a general, non-committal context where the role of the resident is in “community climate action… [for climate] transformation” where “all citizens have the opportunity to make this [transformation] happen” (BRS OCCP, p. 21). Similarly, Amsterdam's climate plan process only uses public participation to promote its agenda to already supporting or empowered/able individuals “to take preparatory measures to make the city as climate-proof as possible” (AMS SCA, p. 9).
Bristol's discussion of skills transfer is the only part of their climate plan that brings a more justice-oriented, racialized lens to planning by mentioning people of color. Bristol recognizes the knowledge of “some ethnic minority communities” regarding better strategies to adapt to climate change. Still, the perceived value of partnering with ethnic minority communities is unclear, and the city's approach remains top-down. Bristol's climate plan states that there are a “number of environmentally sensitive practices, which those communities do not badge as ‘green,’ that could be more widely shared as part of existing knowledge, language and other skills transfer” for designing city-wide green climate adaptation strategies, especially green ones (BRS OCCS, p. 24). Although the purpose of skills transfer may be well-intentioned, this passage does not explain a transfer of knowledge and skills but rather an extraction of perceived ‘cultural’ practices. Specifically, this passage situates the city department as the actor to take knowledge and skills of ethnic minority communities to benefit city interests, without discussing any benefit provided to these ethnic minority communities otherwise unmentioned throughout the plan. Additionally, it is unclear whom Bristol's climate plan refers to within the general reference to ethnic minority communities, further flattening and othering their ethnic minority communities by referring to “those communities” rather than expressions of unity such as “our community” used throughout the rest of the climate plan.
4.2. Pattern 2: omitting social vulnerabilities by exclusionary determinations of need
Montréal and Toulouse's climate plans and health plans fall short of effectively addressing social equity issues despite acknowledging their importance. While these plans recognize the connection between social injustices and health inequities, they primarily focus on individual biophysical vulnerabilities to climate impacts, omitting measures to address socio-structural vulnerabilities. Both cities acknowledge the need to devise strategies for intersectional and multidisciplinary approaches to address the multifaceted impacts of climate change. However, while Montréal and Toulouse's plans assert participatory processes, the plans only mention the involvement of professional experts and large organizations in participation efforts and fail to mention any participation of historically marginalized groups. Although these plans touch on aspects of the ‘traditional’ justice framework, they fall short of demonstrating strategies to address these justice issues. Testimonial justice and hermeneutical justice are particularly lacking in these plans, restricting meaningful consideration and participation of historically marginalized groups. Although these plans consider the interaction of climate and health, there is a missing link in integrating environmental justice and health equity. Thus, many historically marginalized groups are left unprotected from the harmful health impacts of climate change.
4.2.1. Equity-aware planning: timid steps toward addressing socio-structural inequalities
Montréal and Toulouse do not discuss health inequities in their plans but recognize the link between social injustices and health inequalities. Despite this recognition, Montréal and Toulouse's health plans primarily focus on the individual and (presumed) asocial nature of biophysical vulnerabilities to climate impacts, such as congenital illness, youth, natural aging, and allergies (TLS TCAEP, p. 3). Toulouse mentions the role of “construct[ing] quality social housing” for urban heat resilience (TLS TCAEP, p. 5), and Montréal's climate plan even recognizes the “people in situations of homelessness and in situations of precarity or poverty” (MTL CP, p. 54). While these cities recognize these social inequities, they provide little detail on the distributional justice strategies for people experiencing them. For example, Toulouse's climate plan mentions the intent to build “an ecological network resilient to climate change” with “planters” and a “canal plan” (TLS TCAEP, p. 5). Montreal's climate plan commits to “improve the quality and extent of urban nature…so that all young people, especially the less fortunate, can reap the social and environmental benefits of the [green] network” (MTL CP, p. 55). However, the plan provides no subsequent detail as to the distributive justice considerations of expanding the green network for the benefit of “the less fortunate.”
Although Toulouse considers biophysical vulnerabilities within its climate planning and health planning and specifies who is most vulnerable to climate impacts, the city and its regional agencies do not explicitly claim to use equity or justice as a framework. Instead, the plans include “transversal” strategies to address the relationship between climate change and social inequities. Although Toulouse's climate plan recognizes socio-economic position as an essential consideration for climate-resilient housing, the plan does not consider these factors in its green infrastructure plans nor discuss other social dimensions of inequity, such as gender, race, immigration status, or the intersectionality of these dimensions. Meanwhile, Toulouse's health plan groups disabilities with social vulnerabilities. While this might be an honest effort toward distributional justice, the regional environmental health plan describes little-to-no information on the actionable steps of their climate plans and health plans and instead resigns the responsibility of the regional government to define these steps because each community is “so unique.” Specifically, Toulouse reassures that the health plan is not “limiting the target population to disadvantaged populations” (TLS RPHE, p. 62), presenting this approach as a strength of their planning and a reflection of the ‘French tradition’ of equality and “integration.”
Like Toulouse, Montréal has started to recognize social inequities but does not develop specific strategies to address social vulnerabilities. Using the inequitable health impacts of COVID-19 as an example, Mayor Valérie Plante of Montréal states the importance of “equity” for emergency preparation and climate adaptation in the Foreword of the climate plan. Though an essential step in recognitional justice, Montreal does not develop specific provisions for residents experiencing socio-structural vulnerabilities within their climate plan or their health plan. For instance, Montréal's climate plan discusses distributional justice gaps in tree cover and urban heat island effect without considering the socio-structural gaps in adaptive capacity or who might benefit most from green initiatives. This misalignment in recognitional and distributive justice strategies may be due in part to the working definition provided in Montréal's climate plan on social equity, which describes basic needs for all citizens to be met no matter their “economic resources and personal characteristics.” This definition is more aligned with definitions of equality and departs from their stated aims for social equity. Further, Montréal's climate plan or health plan does not explicitly recognize Indigenous communities as a climate-vulnerable or heat-vulnerable group, despite ongoing academic and public trends to recognize the environmental injustices of Indigenous communities throughout Canada (Dhillon & Young, 2010; Evangeliou, 2020; Mascarenhas, 2007; McGregor et al., 2020; O'Toole & Kestler-D'Amours, 2021).
4.2.2. Emerging collaboration in climate and health: epistemic changes in ‘relevant’ sectors
Montréal and Toulouse use the language of protecting and preserving health as justification for greening and climate adaptation strategies. However, the terms protection and preservation assume an ableist perspective that everyone is already healthy in the current systems and that the only threat to health is climate impacts. Although Montréal and Toulouse do not have climate-specific health plans, each city has health plans focused on environmental impacts. Montréal's health plan broadly focuses on the risk of extreme heat, and Toulouse's regional health plan addresses general environmental factors. The Toulouse regional environmental health plan mirrors Toulouse's climate plan's justifications that “a healthy environment is a source of health and well-being and contributes to a better quality of life” (TLS RPHE, p. 2).
Toulouse's climate plan justifies the creation of unspecified green infrastructure plans to “consolidate and develop natural spaces for a cool and resilient city.” However, beyond the general claims of greening for the health benefits against increased heat, Montréal and Toulouse do not demonstrate any frameworks or pathways to justify further proposed health protection strategies and interventions for climate-vulnerable populations. With this lack of justification, Montréal and Toulouse adopt an automatic, unquestioned belief of ‘green as good’ (Angelo, 2021) and the benefit of greening for the health of everyone. While Montréal's extreme heat plan mentions vulnerability to heat as “a combination of individual, behavioural, social and environmental risk factors,” it does not explain the relationships between them (MTL ESHP, p. 10). Montreal's health plan, therefore, does not locate its point of intervention to protect health in climate action for social equity. That said, Toulouse's climate plan does not claim to be achieving a ‘healthy city,’ as the different climate plans do, but rather a “sustainable city.”
However, despite the limited framework for climate resilience (and health benefits), Montréal and Toulouse's climate plans state their awareness of the need for intersectional and multidisciplinary approaches, emphasizing the importance of partnering with practitioners and professionals from other fields of knowledge. Specifically, Montréal promises to advance climate and health collaborations in their climate plan to understand the social determinants of (climate) health for more just outcomes. Further, Montréal's climate plan incorporates deepening its understanding of the social capital of its community by collaborating with Montreal's Regional Public Health Department. Similarly, although Toulouse does not mention any intention to collaborate with other municipal departments or government sectors, its climate plans and health plans highlight the need for an external “network of territorial actors (companies, associations, students, metropolitan municipalities).” The diversity of sectors on Montréal's Advisory Board (urban planning, sustainability, health, energy) and Toulouse's network demonstrates an epistemic justice by valuing a diversity of knowledge for the benefit of climate and health, in contrast with Bristol and Amsterdam.
4.2.3. Elite-centered public participation: the value of the ‘expert’
Like Amsterdam and Bristol, Montréal and Toulouse emphasize professional expert contributions to their climate plans. However, unlike Amsterdam and Bristol, Montréal and Toulouse assert procedural justice claims that they are engaging “diverse sets of stakeholders.” Although Montréal and Toulouse held public forums, neither of these cities explicitly mentioned community groups engaged beyond larger bodies (e.g., organizations, associations) and prominent sectoral leaders. Despite Montréal and Toulouse emphasizing their incorporation of participatory processes, neither of these cities stressed testimonial justice in their climate plans or health plans. Though Montréal's extreme heat plan was released publicly, the plan states the intended audience was healthcare administrators. However, the health plan did not describe any public participation processes or future intention for engagement with healthcare professionals or heat-vulnerable groups, despite the plan designing strategies for these specific groups and integrating greening projects these groups self-initiated prior to the start of planning. Further, Montréal's climate plan highlights its advisory committee of 19 members, all with either president or director positions. The committee comprised 13 women and 6 men, only 1 Indigenous member, and 0 Black or non-Black people of color.
Based on the described participation models, Montréal and Toulouse operate on an ‘if we make it, they will come’ mindset for public participation, with little acknowledgment of the socio-structural barriers that impede historically marginalized groups vulnerable to climate impacts from engaging in traditional planning and governance spaces. Montréal and Toulouse's climate plans and health plans do not consider the contexts in which community members can act (on protection measures, on public calls for engagement), highlighting an important but often overlooked hermeneutical injustice. While Toulouse's climate plan states it “allow[s] residents to be actors,” hinting at empowerment, this statement is made within the context of educating residents on climate preparedness and behaviors for protection against extreme weather. Thus, Toulouse's climate plan strategies locate the responsibility to respond and prepare for climate impacts on residents, whereby if residents receive the proper education, they should be able to act accordingly. Similarly, despite Montréal's health plan stressing linguistic challenges from the city's increasing diversity, Montréal does not mention hermeneutical justice practices for minority groups to engage with public bodies. Despite language being a sensitive socio-political issue in the province of Québec (where French is a minority language in Canada) and in the Occitanie region (with a significant population of working-class immigrants from Northern Africa), meaningful and equitable community participation necessitates efforts to overcome language and cultural barriers.
4.3. Pattern 3: aspiring to transform governance by recognizing structural injustice
Portland's climate plan and health plan are grounded in principles of social justice and health equity, acknowledging the historical marginalization of certain groups. However, there are areas within these plans that lack clarity and specificity for rectifying past injustices and dismantling socio-structural vulnerabilities, as the plans claim. While the plans demonstrate a commitment to collaboration across sectors and partnerships with community-led coalitions, there remain challenges in adequately representing the experiences of historically marginalized groups. Portland comprehensively connects climate and health equity initiatives with various sectors and community groups, aiming to enhance community capacity for climate resilience and improve health outcomes among historically marginalized groups. However, Portland's climate and health strategies fall short of hermeneutical justice and do not fully align with community concerns and interests. This missing link is crucial for addressing the relationship between climate resilience and health equity, such that plans comprehensively address the climate protections and health supports historically marginalized communities most need and see as most impactful.
4.3.1. Equity seeking: deliberate efforts to integrate justice principles
Portland uses equity- and justice-specific language and establishes recognitional justice by recognizing low-income communities and communities of color as historically marginalized groups in their city. This recognition appears to stem from Portland's more recent epistemic justice practices of continuously validating the role of racism and traditional structures of oppression in holding responsibility for existing injustices and health inequities. However, despite Portland's stated intentions to “implement actions that benefit under-served and under-represented communities” (PDX CAP: FPR, p. 57), it remains unclear from their climate plan and health plan how their green climate strategies are anticipated to redress these historical wrongdoings. This ambiguity is especially evident in the limited detail provided in each of these plans to address “underlying racial and socioeconomic inequalities in our society” or the distributional justice considerations that expose historically marginalized groups to (worse) climate impacts or prevent access to (adaptive) resources. Further, while Portland highlights the importance of assessing unintended consequences in the shared justice frameworks of their plans, the climate plan and health plan do not consider the distributional injustices resulting from their prior green interventions. The language of ‘intentionality,’ such as “intentional community engagement,” is used throughout Portland's climate plan and appears to be coded language for prioritizing visible, equity principles in plans and strategies. However, this intention(ality) requires the alignment of multiple justice principles and dedicated financial resources to enact this intentionality in practice. As exemplified by the limited discussion of unintended consequences of climate adaptation, this alignment is not observed in Portland's climate plan.
4.3.2. Community collaboration for climate and health: a shift in the epistemic values of expertise
Portland justifies greening with claims of protecting health by improving air quality and reducing the urban heat island effect. Portland further extends the relationships between health and climate by incorporating the relevance of healthy food and health inequities in the climate plan itself. Moreover, Portland's health plan is specific to climate change and ties climate change to specific social determinants of health. The health plan also introduces a framework on climate equity and justice for climate planners “to better understand the health disparities that may be impacted by climate change, and to develop interventions or actions that keep equity in mind so that we [Multnomah County] do not further exacerbate existing disparities” (PDX CCPH, p. 10). Portland's health plan delineates a process for assessing vulnerabilities that challenge prevailing hierarchies of worthiness for basic needs and security, centering distributional justice by identifying and serving socio-structurally vulnerable populations and providing “culturally competent and accessible education materials…to vulnerable populations” (PDX CCPH, p. 15).
The strong sectoral partnerships exhibited between the Portland (Multnomah County) Office of Planning and Sustainability and the Multnomah Health Department demonstrate an epistemic justice: both by an understanding of the overlaps between climate, green infrastructure, and health and the accepted gaps in knowledge of each sector to address this relationship separately. Additionally, Portland's climate plan highlights its intersectoral partnerships with community-led coalitions, such as the Action Communities for Health, Innovation and Environmental Change (ACHIEVE) Coalition, a coalition of community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, and government agencies, identified as key to “address the social determinants of health through multi-sectoral systems and policy actions,” including “pedestrian, bicycle, and transit transportation systems that link health justice with improved land use and environmental design” (PDX CAP: FPR, p. 59).
4.3.3. Elevating diverse perspectives: a step toward testimonial and hermeneutical justice
Portland's climate plan and health plan explicitly point to the expertise of “low-income populations and communities of color” in decision-making and attempts to remove the epistemic injustices of biases toward historically marginalized groups in planning. For example, Portland's climate plan describes elevating lived experience by planning to “increase equitable tree canopy distribution across all neighborhoods.” Further, Portland's climate plan demonstrates the integration of testimonial justice with the intent to be “inclusive and…elevate the perspectives and expertise of communities typically excluded from climate action planning efforts” (PDX CAP: FPR, p. 15). Though an important step, Portland still equates organizations serving historically marginalized groups with historically marginalized people themselves. For example, Portland's climate plan and health plan illustrate an advocacy model from well-organized community-based organizations (rather than informal groups and individual residents) with traditional hierarchical structures and robust communication infrastructure. This process demonstrates testimonial injustice by formally classifying who is a credible source to share expertise on behalf of historically marginalized people and calls into question who has the right to represent whom.
Portland's climate plan and health plan consider both epistemic justice and testimonial justice when engaging with historically marginalized groups. However, the described participatory structures within both the climate plan and health plan are built within traditional practices of engagement without hermeneutical justice and do not take into consideration the broader socio-cultural and educational contexts from which historically marginalized residents join government spaces: the preparation to understand the materials that will be discussed or presented, the unspoken decorum and expectations within these spaces, and logistics of time, transportation, compensation, and language; and the failure to provide technical support to understand documents and procedures. For instance, as meeting hosts and facilitators, the City of Portland representatives decide the agenda, determine the terminology used to describe existing problems, and frame the value or significance of these problems for the community. In this structure, the local government rarely shares with participants the tools and support required to participate in government meetings and balance problem-defining and decision-making power, not allowing alternative tools and practices to emerge and take hold. For example, this hermeneutical misalignment was mentioned as a barrier in Portland's climate plan with the need to “shift priorities due to a greater focus on integrating equity in climate work” because “some actions in the 2015 Climate Action Plan do not align with current community priorities” (PDX CAP: FPR, p. 62).
5. Discussion
This comparative, multiple-case study of five cities in the Global North demonstrates how cities of varying social, political, and environmental contexts account for environmental justice and health equity in their climate-adaptive greening initiatives. Specifically, we identified three contrasting patterns: Neglecting, Omitting, and Aspiring, each representing varying degrees of integration of the ‘traditional’ justice framework (recognitional, distributional, procedural). Our findings support that the limitations of bringing health equity and environmental justice together in green climate adaptation planning primarily stem from overlooked ‘foundational’ justice concerns (epistemic, testimonial, and hermeneutical), that contribute to the existence of isolated and exclusionary planning and knowledge-sharing processes. From our analytical framework, we propose that epistemic injustice contributes to the erasure of historical contexts of marginalization and health inequities that cannot be improved by climate adaptation or greening alone (Cole et al., 2019). Testimonial injustice upholds biases that preclude residents without professional expertise from the planning process, which often produces green infrastructure plans that do not support the needs, interests, or health of historically marginalized residents (Anguelovski, 2016; Cole et al., 2017). Though involving community leaders and community-based organizations in decision-making processes is vital, emphasis on residents with more power, institutional knowledge, or access to city officials still upholds inequitable procedural systems. Hermeneutical injustice thus impedes genuine and meaningful participation with residents closest to climate impacts and directly experiencing health inequities from co-creating their local green infrastructure and other climate-adaptive strategies (Gavin et al., 2015). As such, we argue that the extent to which ‘traditional’ justice is incorporated into climate plans and health plans is predicated on the extent to which urban (climate) planners and public health practitioners perceive and engage with the ‘foundational’ justice dimensions. Thus, the role of these ‘foundational’ justice principles is critical to address the systemic barriers and biases that undermine Schlosberg's ‘traditional’ justice framework and are necessary when planning and evaluating the justice implications of climate plans and health plans to create more just outcomes of climate adaptation measures (e.g., green infrastructure), including more equitable health benefits.
Our findings reflect similar patterns of limited inclusive and multifaceted expertise to those found by Mabon et al. (2022) in assessing epistemic justice in nature-based solutions across five cities in Europe and Asia (with an overlap of Amsterdam). For instance, Mabon et al. (2022) noted a “dominance in natural science perspectives and the sidelining the expertise from the social sciences, arts, and humanities (as well as from outside academia)” (Mabon et al., 2022). This sidelining of other knowledge bases aligns with what Carel and Kidd (2021) describe as institutional opacity, which “imposes high epistemic demands [on outside groups]…, requiring the acquisition and exercise of knowledge, understanding, confidence, skills, and communicative competencies needed to meet the institution's demands and to be able to navigate it effectively.” They argue that this opacity directly undermines testimonial and hermeneutical justice as “rules, norms, or underlying conceptions of credibility” are obscured and voices are silenced (Carel & Kidd, 2021). Our findings affirm this opacity to be upheld and even enforced between sectors, necessarily restricting the ability of such climate adaptation strategies to achieve the claimed health benefits or equitable outcomes. Thus, supporting the call to question and challenge dominant epistemologies and ontologies for intersectionality and just climate planning (Mikulewicz et al., 2023).
Similarly, despite claims toward health co-benefits or commitments toward social justice in climate plans, we noticed a paucity of contributions from the public health sector, further supporting calls from public health scholars for more intersectional planning measures that include a public health lens (Cole et al., 2017; Corburn, 2004, Corburn, 2007; Kotsila & Anguelovski, 2023; Williams et al., 2022). As such, these epistemic hierarchies in sectoral knowledge obscure the systemic impacts of climate change and the relevance of incorporating diverse sectors (e.g., public health, housing, transportation) and diverse experiences (e.g., low-income groups and communities of color) in developing more comprehensive and equitable climate adaptation for more equitable health outcomes (Mikulewicz et al., 2023) and contributing civic expertise to the process (Oscilowicz et al., 2023). Our findings also confirm the lack of diverse perspectives and expertise, particularly from those outside academia and higher-education professions, such as lived expertise of residents and local expert knowledge. While previous research has focused on procedural justice as a question of who participates in decision-making processes (Meerow et al., 2019; Schlosberg, 2007), this study adds to the understanding of procedural justice as a question of how one participates. For instance, this study highlights the role of hermeneutical justice in shaping participant capacity to meaningfully participate in the development and decision-making of climate-adaptive greening that aligns with the social and health experiences of historically marginalized groups.
5.1. Strengths and limitations
Given each city's varying governance structures and broader institutional and historical contexts, particularly for public health initiatives, it is difficult to compare at the municipal level. However, cities are often held responsible for protecting and promoting residents' health and managing infrastructure and other planning initiatives. Thus, this scale of comparison is appropriate given the study's goals. Moreover, the expectations of government and the extent to which residents believe government should integrate community engagement in (green) planning might vary for each city from differing social, historical, and political contexts. Therefore, the assumption that the lack of public participation is antithetical to justice might be more nuanced in cities where many residents feel there is a representative governing body (notably, Amsterdam and Bristol). In addition, this study does not account for national-level policies and informal grass-roots initiatives.
Lastly, the execution or implementation of the reviewed plans is beyond the scope of analysis for this study. It should be noted that written strategies for social justice or health equity and intersectoral partnership do not guarantee successful implementation or outcomes (Carel & Kidd, 2021; Castán Broto & Westman, 2017). However, although city plans can only reflect the public, self-reported goals for each city, they reflect the “objectives of those delivering or publicizing the initiative” (Meerow et al., 2019) and provide insight into their perceived roles and city practices. The selected five cities also offer a valuable sample to examine narratives and principles of environmental justice and health equity and diverse partner approaches to collaboration as planned by municipal climate and public health initiatives. Lastly, although not exhaustive in terms of planning types, our cities represent a diversity of municipal and international planning histories at the intersection of climate, greening, health (overall and health equity), and social justice from cities in Western Europe, the UK, Canada, and the US.
6. Conclusions
Our study shows a spectrum of awareness and commitment to environmental justice and health equity when developing green infrastructure for climate adaptation. We show that the ability to incorporate Schlosberg's ‘traditional’ justice concepts (recognitional, distributional, procedural) in climate-adaptive planning for health equity is determined by the extent to which urban (climate) planners and public health practitioners perceive and engage with ‘foundational’ justice dimensions (epistemic, testimonial, and hermeneutical).
Even cities that integrate all three components of the traditional justice framework (like Portland) face significant barriers to planning for procedural justice by missing hermeneutical justice principles necessary for building capacity for or modifying spaces of engagement for meaningful participation. Therefore, although using the ‘traditional’ justice framework is an essential step in developing more just and equitable climate-adaptive greening and health benefits, we propose the use of the ‘foundational’ justice dimensions as a complementary and necessary analytical framework to further drive and embed justice and health equity in green infrastructure planning.
Finally, collaboration from diverse forms of knowledge and sectors can contribute to more comprehensive green infrastructure planning that considers how plans achieve purported health benefits for historically marginalized groups. Delineating greening intervention pathways through an intersectional, multidisciplinary framework can help specify how health inequities (rather than health broadly) are addressed by green infrastructure and other climate adaptation strategies. This pathway delineation also presents the opportunity to map unintended health and social consequences. By proactively mapping these impacts, strategies can be developed to mitigate the potential pitfalls of inequitable climate resilience and uneven health benefits, ensuring these issues are addressed within the original plans rather than being relegated to an afterthought.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the EU Horizon 2020 European Research Council (ERC) project GreenLULUs [GA678034] and contributes to ICTA-UAB “María de Maeztu” Programme for Units of Excellence of the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation, and Universities [CEX2019-000940-M]. This work was also supported by the EU Horizon Research and Innovation project GreenME [01084198] and the EU Proof of Concept project Climate Justice Ready [101081926]. ACBC received funding from the AGAUR Catalan governmental agency [2021FI_B00513]. HVSC received funding from the Banco Santander-UAB TALENT fellowship program. MTM received funding from the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation, and Universities Ramon y Cajal fellowship program [RYC2021-034215-l].