Abstract
Background
Changes to the transportation system that promote active transportation – walking, cycling, public transit – can promote important population health gains. However, these potential benefits may not impact everyone equally. We do not know how much they may address, or conversely widen, existing racial and socioeconomic health disparities. This study aims to review existing research that investigates the distribution of health impacts of active transportation interventions across indicators of race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status.
Methods
We conducted a scoping review of peer-reviewed literature and other significant research to identify studies using a longitudinal design to evaluate the health outcomes of an active transportation intervention, and to compare differences between groups based on race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status. We searched PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Transport Research International Documentation between January 1, 2000 and October 21, 2020.
Results
Our search resulted in 7226 records that we screened for keyword relevance by title. We identified 3246 abstracts to review further but ultimately found only 10 studies meeting all our inclusion criteria. These 10 studies evaluated behavior change programs, pedestrian and cycling infrastructure improvements, and increased transit infrastructure or access. Eight of these studies found that the intervention had a positive impact on health outcomes overall. When compared across indicators of participant race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status, nine found either no significant difference or a favorable impact of the intervention on the health outcome for disadvantaged groups studied.
Conclusion
A significant gap in the literature persists, representing missed opportunities to further our understanding of how health inequities might be mitigated or addressed through changes in active transportation infrastructure, promotional campaigns, and policies. We call for researchers to include equity in the development of conceptual models, interventions, study design, and data analysis.
Questions answered in this article
BetaPowered by GenAI
This is generative AI content and the quality may vary. 
Learn more
.

What types of active transportation interventions are linked to improvements in population health?

Why is it important to consider equity in the design and evaluation of active transportation interventions?

How does the lack of analysis comparing intervention impacts across different groups affect health equity?

How can a thorough literature review inform the study design for active transportation interventions?

What role do transportation systems play in influencing health outcomes?
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Active transportationActive travelHealthHealth equityResearch design
1. Introduction
Health inequities, defined as avoidable inequalities in health, are rooted in social determinants including the physical and social environments where people grow, live, work, and age (CSDH 2008). Availability of safe environments for active transportation –walking, bicycling, or public transit – is one such social determinant of health. Transportation systems influence personal safety, environmental exposures, and opportunities for physical activity as well as access to jobs, health care, and social networks. Both the health-promoting and harm-producing effects of transportation systems follow similar patterns of inequity for people and communities who face structural disadvantages including socioeconomic deprivation and systemic racism. It is well established that communities with greater socioeconomic deprivation or higher proportions of racially or ethnically minoritized groups experience disproportionate exposure to the air and noise pollution from traffic (Dreger et al., 2019; Fairburn et al., 2019) and bear a greater burden of pedestrian traffic collision injuries and fatalities (Aguero-Valverde et al., 2006; Hamann et al., 2020; Laflamme et al., 2000).
Active transportation interventions such as physical changes to the built environment (e.g. speed bumps, pedestrian islands), legislation (e.g. speed limits), or community engagement programs (e.g., Every Body Walk! Collaborative (America Walks)) are closely linked with population health. Improvements in traffic safety – such as reducing vehicle travel speeds – decrease the frequency and severity of crashes (Richter et al., 2006; Soole et al., 2013; Vecino-Ortiz et al., 2018). Interventions that promote active transportation are also associated with increased physical activity (Brown et al., 2017). Commuting by walking or bicycling has widely been associated with improved cardiometabolic health (Celis-Morales et al., 2017; Dinu et al., 2019; Pucher et al., 2010) and improved mental health (Avila-Palencia et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2015).
Yet there is limited evidence to clarify whether the distribution of the health outcomes associated with active transportation interventions is equitable across groups within populations. Interventions designed to improve population health can inadvertently worsen health inequities (Frohlich et al., 2008). A systematic review of interventions to reduce air pollution in urban areas found that while the interventions improved air quality and mortality overall, they had mixed results in terms of benefiting vulnerable populations like older adults and people living with socioeconomic deprivation (Benmarhnia et al., 2014). Interventions did not take into consideration that certain groups had greater exposure to traffic risks or vulnerability to the negative impacts of traffic at baseline and therefore these interventions could not account for differing levels of need. In addition, vulnerable groups were primarily found to benefit more in simulation/modeling studies rather than in true observational studies, potentially because interventions were assumed to benefit all exposed participants equally without considering the impact of inequitable vulnerability and distribution of baseline risk. If equity is not considered in the design, implementation, and evaluation of active transportation interventions, there is the potential to exacerbate health disparities through processes such as traffic displacement and unfair allocation of resources.
The primary objective of this scoping review is to synthesize knowledge of the health equity impacts of active transportation interventions across different population groups based on race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. This objective lends itself to a scoping review due to the heterogenous nature of active transportation interventions and health outcomes evaluated in this field (Munn et al., 2018). In this scoping review, we characterize the conceptual models, methodologies, and findings of studies that investigate the distribution of an active transportation intervention's health outcomes across domains of structural disadvantage including race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Understanding the health equity impacts of active transportation interventions is essential for creating a framework for including equity in future research as well as the design and implementation of active transportation interventions. This is particularly relevant to the development of community health policies as well as the actions of health care providers as they participate in population health management and community engagement.
2. Methods
2.1. Inclusion criteria
To be considered, studies were required to meet the following inclusion criteria:
•
Published in the English language in a peer-reviewed academic journal or other record of transportation research such as a government report, technical report, or conference proceeding.
•
Published on or after January 1, 2000.
•
Study design: Primary studies evaluating before-and-after associations between an active transportation intervention and one or more health outcomes. Acceptable study designs included longitudinal prospective cohort studies as well as natural experiments with before-and-after data points.
•
Study population: General population (adults or children)
•
Study intervention: Active transportation intervention – including changes to the built environment, awareness and promotion campaigns, community engagement projects – that aimed to increase safe travel by walking, cycling or public transit.
•
Study outcomes: One or more measures of transportation injury and injury severity, physical activity, obesity-related outcomes (e.g. weight, BMI, waist circumference, adipose tissue, etc.), cardiometabolic health, pulmonary health, or mental health.
•
Health equity assessment: Studies were included only if they assessed the distribution of the health outcomes of the active transportation intervention by race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status.
2.2. Search strategy and data sources
We conducted a comprehensive search of the literature using the Preferred Reporting Items of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines (Moher et al., 2009) as well as the extension for scoping reviews (Tricco et al., 2018) and the statement for equity-focused reviews (Welch et al., 2016). We developed a search strategy (see Appendix Table A.1) in consultation with a health sciences academic librarian and utilizing a multidisciplinary approach including key concepts in healthcare, public health, transportation engineering, and urban planning. Our strategy involved four “AND” keyword categories: Transportation AND Intervention AND Health Outcome AND Equity (see Appendix for full search strategy). Of note, we included “health disparity” and variations on this keyword under our Equity keyword category despite these terms no longer being synonymous with health inequities – disparities refer to differences where inequities are now understood to be differences driven by systemic injustices. This inclusion was intended to capture previous studies that may have used health disparities language when they were more specifically investigating health inequities.
We searched 4 electronic databases to encompass studies in the United States and internationally: PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Transport Research International Documentation. We also screened for studies from reference lists of previous review articles of related topics and expert recommendation. Our initial search was done in September 2019 and yielded 7059 results after duplicates were removed (Fig. 1). A second search was completed in October 2020 to identify results published in the intervening year. This second search yielded 167 results after duplicates were removed (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (370KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Prisma flow diagram.
2.3. Data extraction, review and reporting from abstracts
The first two authors, KH and MG, screened the 7226 database search results by title after confirming 92% screening concordance in a sample of 100 titles. Based on screening titles for relevant keywords, we identified 3246 results for review by abstract (Fig. 1). All three authors participated independently in abstract screening after reaching concordance by reviewing the same two random samples of 32 abstracts (these 64 abstracts represented 2% of the full 3246 abstracts identified for further screening). Throughout the abstract review process each author discussed any questions about abstract review with the other two co-authors to reach a consensus determination. We extracted four categories of data from all 3246 abstracts: study design, intervention, outcome, and comparison groups. If any of these categories were not clear from the abstract, we also indicated this. Of the 3246 titles we identified to have relevant keywords 1419 abstracts (59.5%) described or evaluated the built environment, often using a cross sectional study design. Only 611 abstracts (18.8%) described evaluating health outcomes of an active transportation intervention.
2.4. Data extraction, review and reporting from full-text articles
Through independent review of the abstracts above, we identified 240 abstracts to screen further, 226 of which were associated with records we were able to access (Fig. 1). We divided the 226 full-text records amongst the three co-authors for screening and used our inclusion criteria to identify articles to review in detail for our final analysis. We noted reason for exclusion as well as relevant themes relating to study design and health equity for articles that did not meet the full inclusion criteria. The most common reason for exclusion after full-text review was the lack of an equity comparison based on study participants’ socioeconomic status or racial/ethnic identity (n = 105, 49%), although 31 of these studies lacked a comparison because the study intervention was designed to target a specific group based on their socioeconomic status or minoritized racial or ethnic identity. Other common reasons for exclusion were lack of an active transportation intervention (n = 26), cross sectional study design (n = 23), and no health outcome (n = 19). See Fig. 2 for a complete breakdown of reasons articles were excluded from full-text review.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (253KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Reason for excluding record during full-text article screening.Notes: Total number of articles that were screened for inclusion in the full-text review by the primary reason for exclusion. Out of 226 articles screened, 216 articles were excluded.
After screening the 226 articles independently, we identified 31 articles for potential inclusion in our final analysis. All three authors then performed a second review of these 31 articles to confirm whether they met all inclusion criteria. Through this final consensus review we identified 10 articles that met our inclusion criteria (Fig. 1). All three authors reviewed these 10 articles to extract variables including study characteristics (e.g. author disciplines, study setting, type of active transportation intervention, health outcomes measured) and the article's handling of equity in the conceptual model, design, analysis, or discussion of the study.
3. Results
3.1. Characteristics of included studies
In this review, we identified 10 studies investigating the equitable distribution of an active transportation intervention's health outcomes, eight of which were published within the last 10 years (80%). The 10 studies were conducted in the United Kingdom (n = 4), the United States (n = 4), Canada (n = 1), and Mexico (n = 1). Study populations primarily included adults, however one study included adults and children in their study population (Steinbach et al., 2011) and two studies included only children in their study population (Farley et al., 2003; Mendoza et al., 2017).
The most common study designs were the use of a natural experiment (n = 3) or a prospective cohort study (n = 3) to investigate a range of interventions. Other studies used a cluster randomized controlled trial study design (n = 2) or a repeated cross sectional design (n = 2). Studies investigated behavior change programs (n = 4), transit infrastructure or access (n = 3), increasing or improving pedestrian/cycling infrastructure (n = 2), or traffic legislation (n = 1). Studies most commonly evaluated self-reported physical activity as a proxy for health outcomes (n = 5). Other studies used accelerometer or step counters to monitor an objective measure of physical activity (n = 3) and one study also included measures of cardiovascular risk including blood pressure, cholesterol, fasting blood glucose, waist circumference, and body mass index. The remaining two studies investigated road traffic injuries. Study characteristics for each of the 10 studies included in full-text review are summarized in Appendix A (Table A.2; attached as separate file).
3.2. Approach to health equity analysis of included studies
Among the 10 studies that met this review's inclusion criteria, there were a variety of approaches to evaluating the interventions in question, describing relevant outcomes, and discussing the impacts on health equity. Out of the 10 studies included in our review, nine used an indicator of socioeconomic status to further assess the distribution of health outcomes. Proxies of socioeconomic status included individual and area-level factors such as education, household income, employment, housing status, and vehicle ownership. Four studies used race or ethnicity status to assess health outcomes (Table 1). Most studies (n = 6) used the indicator of structural disadvantage as an interaction term in their overall analysis of the outcome (Table 1). The studies that used the indicator of disadvantage as an interaction term in their statistical analysis did not directly position their research as addressing health inequities through their conceptual model or discussion, apart from one study that had employed a targeted intervention while comparing its outcomes across racial and ethnic groups as well as indicators of socioeconomic status (Beaudoin et al., 2007). The remaining studies (n = 4) used subgroup analysis to compare absolute and relative difference in health outcomes based on the indicators of disadvantage they had identified (Table 1).
Table 1. Indicators of social disadvantage and method of health equity analysis used in articles in this review.
Author and Publication Year	Active Transportation Intervention	Disadvantage Indicators	Method of Health Equity Analysis
Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Race/Ethnicity (n = 4)	Education (n = 5)	Income (n = 4)	Employment (n = 2)	Vehicle Ownership (n = 2)	Areal-level SES (n = 2)	Housing Status (n = 1)	Empty Cell
Beaudoin et al. (2007)	Behavior change program (Physical activity)	x	x	x					Interaction term
Chang et al. (2017)	Transit infrastructure/access (Bus rapid transit)		x		x	x			Subgroup analysis
Coronini-Cronberg et al. (2012)	Transit infrastructure/access (Free bus pass)							x	Interaction term
Farley et al. (2003)	Behavior change program (Bicycle helmet use)						x		Subgroup analysis
Hong et al. (2016)	Transit infrastructure/access (Light rail)			x					Interaction term
Mendoza et al. (2017)	Behavior change program (Bicycle groups)	x							Interaction term
Norwood et al. (2014)	Pedestrian infrastructure		x						Interaction term
Panter et al. (2017)	Pedestrian infrastructure	x	x	x	x	x			Subgroup analysis
Schulz et al. (2015)	Behavior change program (Walking groups)	x	x	x					Interaction term
Steinbach et al. (2011)	Traffic legislation (Speed reduction zones)						x		Subgroup analysis
Notes: Number of studies included in review (n = 10) evaluating health outcomes by indicators of potential disadvantage including Active Transportation Intervention, health outcome(s), disadvantage indicators used for analysis, and type of analysis used.
Table 2. Health outcomes measured and results reported in articles in this review in the studies included in this review (n = 10) as well as the overall reported effects of the intervention studied, and the results of the health equity analysis. If the study used the indicator of disadvantage as an interaction term, this result was the presence or absence of a statistically significant interaction. If the study used subgroup analysis between different disadvantaged subgroups, this result was differing or similar outcomes between subgroups.
Author and Publication Year	Active Transportation Intervention	Health Outcome(s) Measured	Overall Effects	Results of Health Equity Analysis
Beaudoin et al. (2007)	Behavior change program (Physical activity)	Physical activity (self-reported)	No association: Health behaviors did not change significantly (however positive attitudes toward walking increased)	No statistically significant interaction effects of race (Non-Hispanic Black) on walking behavior outcomes
Chang et al. (2017)	Transit infrastructure/access (Bus rapid transit)	Physical activity (self-reported)	Positive association: Increase in walking for transport (29 min per week on average)	Differing outcomes: Female participants with low education experienced greater increases in walking for transport compared with female participants with high education
Coronini-Cronberg et al. (2012)	Transit infrastructure/access (Free bus pass)	Physical activity (self-reported)	Positive association: Increase in likelihood of walking more frequently	Statistically significant positive interaction effect of housing tenure (renting one's home) on increased walking
Farley et al. (2003)	Behavior change program (Bicycle helmet use)	Cycling-related injuries	Positive association: Reduction in bicycle-related head injuries	Similar outcomes: Similar reductions in injuries were seen in poor municipalities compared with richer municipalities
Hong et al. (2016)	Transit infrastructure/access (Light rail)	Physical activity (accelerometer-measured)	Positive association: Increase in walking and minutes of physical activity (for participants with low baseline walking and physical activity)	No statistically significant interaction effect of annual household income (income below $35,000) on minutes of MVPA
Mendoza et al. (2017)	Behavior change program (Bicycle groups)	Physical activity (accelerometer-measured)	Positive association: increase in mean minutes of MVPA per day (21.6 min/day)	No statistically significant interaction effect of race (Non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic) on minutes of MVPA
Norwood et al. (2014)	Walking infrastructure	Physical activity (self-reported)	Negative association: Physical activity decreased over study period (but less so in intervention group compared to control)	Statistically significant positive interaction effect of education (lower education level) on meeting physical activity recommendations
Panter et al. (2017)	Walking and cycling infrastructure	Physical activity (self-reported)	Positive association: Increase in walking for transport	Differing outcomes: Indicators of low socioeconomic status (education level, income, and vehicle ownership) were associated with increases in walking for transport
Schulz et al. (2015)	Behavior change program (Walking groups)	Physical activity (accelerometer-measured), blood pressure, fasting glucose, waist circumference	Positive association: Increase in daily steps, which was in turn associated with reductions in blood pressure, fasting blood glucose, total cholesterol, and measures of weight	Statistically significant negative interaction effect of race (Non-Hispanic Black) on overall steps/physical activity
Steinbach et al. (2011)	Traffic legislation (Speed reduction zones)	Traffic injuries and casualties	Positive association: Reduction in traffic casualties	Differing outcomes: Per kilometer of road, 20 mph zones prevented more casualties in the most deprived areas compared to the least deprived areas
Notes (for Table 2): Health outcomes measured in the studies included in this review (n = 10) as well as the overall reported effects of the intervention studied, and the results of the health equity analysis. If the study used the indicator of disadvantage as an interaction term, this result was the presence or absence of a statistically significant interaction. If the study used subgroup analysis between different disadvantaged subgroups, this result was differing or similar outcomes between subgroups.
3.3. Overall health outcomes reported and health outcomes across different groups
The majority of studies we reviewed found the intervention in question had a positive impact on the health outcome studied overall (n = 8; Table 2). One study investigating a behavior change program found that while the intervention had a positive impact on attitudes toward walking, there was no statistically significant change in the health behavior itself (Beaudoin et al., 2007). The one study that reported a negative association between the intervention (increased local funding for pedestrian infrastructure) and the health outcome (physical activity) found that while physical activity decreased over the study period, it decreased less in the intervention communities compared to the control communities (Norwood et al., 2014).
When comparing indicators of disadvantage including race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status, three studies found no statistically significant interaction effect of the indicator on the outcome studied (Beaudoin et al., 2007; Hong et al., 2016; Mendoza et al., 2017). Two studies found a statistically significant positive interaction between the disadvantage indicator term and improving health outcomes (Coronini-Cronberg et al., 2012; Norwood et al., 2014). One study found a statistically significant negative interaction between the disadvantage indicator term and improving the health outcome – in this case Non-Hispanic Black race was associated with less overall steps compared to the reference group, Non-Hispanic White race (Schulz et al., 2015).
Of the studies that performed subgroup analyses, one found similar outcomes in injury reduction between poor and rich municipalities after implementation of the intervention (Farley et al., 2003). The remaining three studies found differing outcomes across population subgroups. Chang et al. (2017) found that female participants with low education experienced greater increases in walking for transport compared with those with high education after the installation of a bus rapid transit line. Similarly, Panter et al. (2017) found that indicators of disadvantage including low education level, low income, and lack of access to a vehicle were associated with increases in walking for transport after an increase in available walking and cycling infrastructure. And Steinbach et al. (2011) found that per kilometer of road, 20 mph speed reduction zones prevented more casualties in the most deprived areas compared to the least deprived areas. The overall and differential effects, or interaction analysis of disadvantage indicator terms are summarized in Table 2.
4. Discussion
4.1. Lack of examination of the distribution of health outcomes of active transportation interventions
Understanding the relationship between active transportation interventions and disparities in health outcomes is an important research area to inform policy in both health promotion and harm prevention. In our search for studies investigating the health equity impact of active transportation interventions we first identified 611 abstracts that described the health outcomes of interventions. However, through further screening and review we found that only 10 of these studies met our review inclusion criteria by investigating the distribution of health outcomes across indicators or race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status. This represents a significant gap in the literature and newfound insight of missed opportunities to further our understanding of how health inequities might be mitigated (or exacerbated) through changes in active transportation infrastructure, promotional campaigns, and policies. Thus, we are not adequately studying interventions with an equity lens.
4.2. Challenges to studying health equity outcomes of transportation interventions
This gap in the literature may result from the difficulty of designing health equity studies of transportation interventions. A significant challenge in designing and conducting these studies is the complexity of the relationship between factors that mediate active transportation and those that influence health. Physical activity is known to be mediated by psychosocial, behavioral, social, and environmental factors (Bauman et al., 2012) and therefore a conceptual framework for how transportation infrastructure, walkability, and the built environment influence a wider range of physical and mental health outcomes is understandably complex (Frank et al., 2019). The study of active transportation interventions to improve health outcomes is likely to include many potential confounders and limitations (Saelens et al., 2012; Krizek et al., 2009). Understanding the health equity impacts of individual changes to these complex built environment and transportation ecosystem relationships has led to more potential for confounding and to less ability to generalize beyond local contexts (Gelormino et al., 2015).
The choice of study design is an important step to balance the tradeoff between the breadth of variables assessed and the ability to evaluate causal pathways. Of the 3246 abstracts we screened 44.4% (n = 1442) were cross sectional studies, many of which evaluated a feature of the built environment, such as the current walkability of a community or the density of green space within a community. Cross sectional studies of the built environment, while limited in their ability to draw conclusions about causal relationships, can help prioritize potential interventions to study further, as well as identify groups experiencing health disparities that may benefit from targeted interventions (Day, 2006). Natural experiments and repeated cross sectional studies can be used to strengthen hypotheses about associations between active transportation and health equity, which can help prioritize prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials. We recommend future research conceptualization begin with a focused evaluation of the available evidence based on study design to help clarify what level of design will best support or advance the current understanding of the association between an active transportation intervention and its impact on health equity.
Another approach to refining a study question in health equity and active transportation research is to evaluate whether the implementation of the intervention results in equitable access across the population. Particularly for the promotion of behavior change or an investment in infrastructure, evaluating whether the reach of an intervention is equitable may help guide whether or not further study is needed to study objective measures of health outcomes through expensive or time intensive data collection methods. This is another instance where cross sectional studies can be useful for identifying and describing disparities in the distribution of current interventions – for example, a cross sectional study found the implementation of Walking School Bus programs in Auckland, New Zealand to be concentrated in neighborhoods with lower levels of socioeconomic deprivation (Collins et al., 2005). When studying a novel intervention or evaluating how to best tailor interventions to meet a specific community's needs we recommend applying the RE-AIM framework, which evaluates the reach, efficacy, adoption, implementation, and maintenance of an intervention (Glasgow et al., 1999). This can help researchers design and modify interventions that can then be implemented in a way that reaches and impacts target populations to promote equity in health outcomes.
At all levels of research – whether investigating associations, causal relationships, or the implementation of interventions – community-based participatory research (CBPR) partnerships are central to promoting health equity (Ward et al., 2018). Methods of research that center the community, such as CBPR, have the potential to provide direct benefits to the people being studied, but they are also associated with additional challenges for researchers including investing time into learning additional research methodology and developing trusting relationships with community partners (Ahmed et al., 2004). These challenges may have contributed to limiting health equity research in active transportation interventions in the past. However, with the growing awareness of how systemic injustices perpetuate health inequities in our society, we call on researchers to center communities using existing frameworks such as CBPR in future studies.
4.3. Interventions that target disparities or that assume a one-size-fits-all effect
In the process of screening 226 articles for inclusion in our full-text review, we ultimately excluded 105 studies because they did not evaluate differences in outcomes by race, ethnicity or a socioeconomic indicator. Of those 105 studies, we identified 31 studies (29.5%) that targeted their intervention to address a known health disparity but lacked analysis comparing the impact of the intervention across different groups, which limited their ability to demonstrate the intervention's positive and negative impacts on health equity. Although targeted intervention studies can provide important insights into how best to meet a community's specific and unique needs when addressing a health disparity through active transportation interventions (Salinas and Parra-Medina, 2019), further research is needed to understand the effectiveness of interventions targeted at disadvantaged groups compared to those interventions that are deployed universally (Love et al., 2017).
Understanding the health equity impacts of an intervention involves acknowledging complex relationships and pathways between the intervention and the outcome. For example, in the studies we evaluated for this scoping review, two studies using subgroup analysis found an increase in physical activity or walking for transport among population subgroups with indicators of disadvantage such as lower education levels, lower income, and lack of access to a vehicle (Chang et al., 2017; Panter et al., 2017). While these disadvantaged groups experienced a positive increase in a measure of health behavior, the increase may reflect these participants’ restricted options for mobility (Shareck et al., 2014). In this sense, the increase in physical activity may be a burden and not necessarily a benefit. We also identified an example of complicated health equity considerations in Steinbach et al. (2011). While the intervention of 20 mph speed reduction zones was estimated to have prevented more casualties in the zones in the most deprived areas compared to the zones in the least deprived areas, the overall decrease in casualties on all roads during the study period was still greater in the least deprived areas. Essentially, given the greater risk of traffic casualties in the most deprived areas at baseline, the intervention mitigated a widening disparity but was unable to significantly reduce the disparity in traffic casualties.
Studies that were deployed universally, that is, those that did not target a known disparity or include a comparative analysis of the intervention effects across population subgroups, may be inappropriately assuming a one-size-fits-all effect. Health inequities are in part driven by systemic injustices that will continue to perpetuate disparate outcomes without intentional change. Without considering health equity impacts, a one-size-fits-all intervention may provide more benefit to well-resourced individuals and communities while having less positive impact on those experiencing disadvantage at baseline. Community-level interventions such as introducing new active transportation infrastructure or green space can also lead to gentrification and displacement (Cole et al., 2017; Williams, 2017) having negative social and health impacts on disadvantaged groups. We strongly recommend the consideration of applying an equity lens (Balajee et al., 2012) as central to future research of the health impacts of active transportation investments.
4.4. Limitations
This review is limited by the methodological challenges of studying the relationship between an active transportation intervention and a health outcome. The overlapping disciplines of urban planning, public health, and medicine bring different methodological strengths and limitations that may restrict the ability to fully evaluate health equity in transportation. The direct relationship between an active transportation intervention and a health outcome is influenced and mediated by multiple personal, societal, and environmental factors.
Our findings may be limited by publication bias, namely that studies of active transportation interventions and their health equity impacts may be less likely to be reported in the gray literature or published in academic journals if the findings are not statistically significant. Our screening and review process may also have failed to identify studies that evaluated health equity but did not make any mention of this in their abstract. This highlights the importance of including equity in the title and abstract of a study if one of the research aims is investigating health equity. Several elements of the PRISMA statement for equity focused reviews (Welch et al., 2016) are useful for considering how to report health equity findings clearly and consistently in publication. One example is the recommendation to provide a conceptual model “to show the pathways through which the intervention is assumed to affect health equity.” In our review of 10 studies meeting our inclusion criteria, only one study included a detailed figure describing the conceptual model for how the intervention was related to the health outcome in question (Schulz et al., 2015).
This review focused specifically on identifying studies using measures of socioeconomic disadvantage and racially or ethnically minoritized status. There are other important indicators of disadvantage that may be relevant to the health equity implications of active transportation interventions such as gender, age, disability, place of residence (including rurality), and many others (O'Neill et al., 2014). Future research should also consider the implications of intersecting life experiences, such as gender and race, on the potential for differential health outcomes of active transportation interventions.
5. Conclusion
There is a significant knowledge gap in the impacts that active transportation interventions have on health equity – in large part because many studies are not considering equity in their design, analysis, and discussion. Consistency in reporting and publication of studies investigating the health equity impacts of active transportation interventions is essential. Investigators should consider applying certain reporting guidelines from the PRISMA statement for equity focused reviews (Welch et al., 2016) to empirical studies such as including equity in the title and abstract and providing a clear conceptual model that describes how the intervention may influence health equity. We recommend researchers, transportation planners, public health practitioners, and other professionals universally consider an equity lens (Balajee et al., 2012) when developing interventions. This entails incorporating an awareness of how race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and other social determinants might influence the unequal distribution of health outcomes.
Future research should aim to address the short- and long-term potential impacts of active transportation interventions to respond to well-documented health inequities. We recommend when determining an appropriate study design, a thorough review of the literature should explore levels of current evidence about the proposed active transportation intervention and health outcomes. If there is ample cross sectional evidence of health equity relationships, can the new study aim for assessing potential causality? If, in rare instances, the literature still lacks a cross sectional evidence base, can that base be created with comparative approaches to health equity in mind? It may also be prudent to begin with a study of whether access to the intervention is equitable (e.g. using the RE-AIM framework (Glasgow et al., 1999)). Targeting or prioritizing interventions to meet the needs of subgroups of the population that experience structural disadvantage may be a critical way to mitigate or correct existing health inequities. Further research is needed to determine the extent to which targeted interventions mitigate population-level health inequities.
Financial disclosure
The authors did not receive any specific funding for this work. Dr. Hansmann's work is supported by a National Research Service Award (T32HP10010) from the Health Resources and Service Administration. Dr. Grabow's work was also supported by the same National Research Service Award (T32HP10010) from the Health Resources and Service Administration while working on this project.