Abstract
Transportation barriers to healthcare access are a critical issue, leading to unmet healthcare needs for millions of Americans each year, particularly among disadvantaged groups. Understanding and addressing these barriers is thus an important step toward improving health equity. To understand how transportation barriers affect healthcare access, this study first utilized a mobile-based trajectory data to map healthcare visit patterns in the City of Dallas in 2021. Next, a random forest model integrated with spatial analysis techniques was employed to examine the associations of transportation factors and socioeconomic status with healthcare visits. Additionally, to inform health equity decisions, the impact of transportation barriers was compared across racial demographics. Results showed that higher transportation network densities was associated with increased healthcare visits, while higher transit and drive time to healthcare, traffic fatalities, and transport cost burden aligned with decreased healthcare visits. Socio-economic factors including higher Medicaid coverage and higher incomes were positively associated with increased visits. Results also showed that Black-white racial inequities in healthcare visits were amplified by transportation barriers. By introducing mobile-based trajectories for healthcare accessibility analysis, this study contributes to the existing literature by enhancing the understanding and resolution of transportation-related barriers to healthcare access.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Transportation barriers Health equity Healthcare access Mobile-based trajectory dataRandom forest Shapley
1. Introduction
Each year, millions of Americans miss or delay medical care due to lack of transportation (Wallace et al., 2005, Wolfe et al., 2020). This issue disproportionately affects vulnerable populations, including low-income individuals and those living in disadvantaged areas (Silver et al., 2012). Without reliable transportation and adequate infrastructure, these groups face significant barriers to accessing healthcare which can lead to worsened health outcomes. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), health equity is achieved when every individual has the opportunity to reach their highest potential for health and well-being (World Health Organization, 2010). Given the critical role of transportation in accessing healthcare, it is essential to understand and address transportation barriers to advance health equity, particularly for disadvantaged populations.
Transportation barriers to healthcare are multifaceted and include issues such as availability and cost of transportation, distance to healthcare, the quality of transportation infrastructure, and more (Oluyede et al., 2022). Over the years, a wide range of studies have focused on understanding and mitigating such barriers. One type of study is survey-based, often targeting individuals with unmet healthcare needs due to transportation barriers to understand these barriers and provide policy recommendations to address them (Cochran et al., 2022, Lu et al., 2022, Shrime et al., 2017, Silver et al., 2012). Another type of research focuses on the issue of proximity and uses spatial analysis methods to identify geographic disparities in access through various techniques (Guagliardo, 2004). However, these types of studies can have several limitations. In survey-based research, respondents may inaccurately report transportation barriers due to memory errors or misunderstandings, or they might lack insight into the technical aspects of infrastructure. Additionally, the high cost of conducting large-scale surveys can limit their scope and frequency. Furthermore, studies on spatial accessibility to healthcare are valuable for identifying geographical disparities in healthcare access and enabling targeted interventions, but often focus primarily on the availability and proximity of healthcare facilities. This approach overlooks other critical barriers such as transportation costs, transportation insecurity, and infrastructure quality, which can impede healthcare access even in areas with nearby healthcare facilities. As such, data-driven research that investigates the impacts of a wide range of transportation barriers on healthcare access, including transportation network quality, transportation cost burden, transportation insecurity, and proximity metrics, is lacking.
To address these methodological and theoretical gaps, this study introduces a novel and data-driven approach, using mobile-based trajectory data, that moves beyond proximity issues to identify a broader set of transportation barriers and their impact on healthcare access. Using the mentioned data, this study tracks healthcare visits from different regions in the City of Dallas, and further investigates how visit patterns are impacted by an expanded set of transportation and socio-economic factors. The year 2021 was selected as the base time frame for the analysis due to the heightened need for healthcare visits during the Delta variant phase of the COVID-19 pandemic. This study first uses a series of data analysis algorithms to infer healthcare utilization from different areas of city. Next, a Random Forest (RF) model combined with spatial analysis tools are used to model healthcare visit patterns. SHAP values are calculated for each of the transportation and socio-economic attributes to investigate their marginal impacts on healthcare utilization. Going beyond merely identifying barriers, this study further applies health equity analysis by designing and comparing SHAP dependency plots, maps, and charts across racial groups.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature on transportation barriers to healthcare access and research efforts to investigate them. In section 3, the process of data preparation and analysis is explained. Section 4 presents and discusses the results, while section 5 encompasses the conclusions section including the limitations of the study and future work.
2. Literature review
Accessibility has been defined in various ways depending on the perspective, but the most common definition is “the ease with which residents of a specific area can reach their desired services” (Gregory, 2009, Jing et al., 2023). In the context of healthcare accessibility, this definition emphasizes the importance of eliminating barriers that prevent individuals from obtaining necessary medical services (Syed et al., 2013, Wang et al., 2021c). As a result, various studies have examined the effects of multiple barriers, spatial distance (Higgs, 2004), financial constraints (Rahman et al., 2022), and transportation-related barriers (Syed et al., 2013), on healthcare access.
Recognizing distance as a key barrier to healthcare access, numerous studies have examined the spatial distance from healthcare facilities, often highlighting equity issues. These studies frequently use different methods to assess spatial access (Guagliardo, 2004). Such methods include but are not limited to: Gravity-based approaches, Float catchment area methods, travel-cost approaches, isochrone approaches, and utility-based approaches (Neutens, 2015, Zhang et al., 2020). Studies show that spatial distance from healthcare is associated with missed or delayed medical visits. For instance, Cui et al. (2020) utilized a two-step floating catchment area (2SFCA) method to study the relationship between spatial access to hospitals and healthcare utilization in eight Canadian metropolitan regions. They found that people in areas with higher spatial accessibility used these services more frequently. Furthermore, a study by Kenny et al. (2015) demonstrated that in rural Liberia, individuals living closer to healthcare facilities were more likely to use maternal and child health services.
However, barriers to healthcare access extend beyond the spatial distance to hospitals, as financial constraints also play a significant role. (Hutchison et al. 2017) found that financial barriers, including the high cost of care and insurance, are the most common barriers faced by patients needing access to tuberculosis care centers in China. This issue was particularly prevalent among rural and ethnic minority patients. Additionally, a study by Lu et. al. (2022) showed that individuals facing financial barriers to healthcare were more likely to report being unhealthy compared to those without such barriers. Transportation, a crucial component of healthcare access, can also create financial barriers that lead to unmet healthcare needs. For example, a study by Shrime et. al. (2017) found that a free transportation scheme reduced the no-show rate by 45 % for surgical patients in three African countries. Furthermore, Cochran et al. (2022) reported that transportation costs were a major barrier to medical care for frequent healthcare users in North Carolina during the COVID-19 pandemic. Approximately 15.2 % of survey respondents cited travel costs, including gasoline, parking, and fares for public transportation, taxis, and ride-hailing services, as barriers to healthcare access.
Apart from costs, transportation-related barriers can impact the ability of people to access healthcare in various ways. A study in 2005 showed that each year on average, approximately 3.6 million Americans, typically those in disadvantaged groups, are unable to access medical care due to transportation barriers (Wallace et al., 2005). Another study with a similar objective showed that in year 2017, 5.8 million persons in the United States delayed medical care due to a lack of transportation (Wolfe et al., 2020). In order to identify different transportation barriers that lead to unmet transportation needs, studies often used survey-based approaches and have found multi-faceted barriers to accessing healthcare (Oluyede et al., 2022). For instance, Mattson (2011) found that lacking personal vehicles, high distance from hospitals, and inconvenient public transport schedules increase the chances of missing or delaying healthcare visits. Silver et al. (2012) found that unreliable bus service and lack of personal vehicles caused immigrants in a New York City suburb to miss or reschedule medical appointments. Moreover, Arcury et al. (2005) found that lack of private transportation, public transportation limitations, and lack of a driver’s license decreased the likelihood of healthcare visits among residents of 12 western North Carolina counties.
However, survey-based studies on transportation barriers to healthcare access have limitations. Respondents may inaccurately report barriers due to memory errors or misunderstandings, leading to skewed results. In addition, they may lack insight into the technical or design aspects of transportation infrastructure affecting access. Also, conducting large-scale surveys can be expensive, especially if they require extensive outreach, data collection, and analysis efforts. This can limit the scale or frequency of surveys that researchers can afford to conduct. Consequently, this study uses mobile-based trajectory data to track healthcare visits and to further investigate the extent to which transportation barriers impact healthcare utilization. Recent advancements in trajectory data collection have allowed several studies to utilize trajectory data to investigate healthcare access (Jing et al., 2023, Kim and Kwon, 2022, Sun et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2021a, Wang et al., 2020). For instance, Wang et al. (2020) used taxi trip trajectory data to evaluate hospital accessibility by analyzing the spatiotemporal dynamics of trips. This allowed researchers to map hospital catchment areas and understand travel patterns. However, studies using taxi data to track trips to healthcare facilities have limitations. Short-distance trips are often overlooked since residents rarely use taxis for brief journeys. Secondly, studies usually focus on just one transportation mode, ignoring options like public transit, personal vehicles, and walking. Moreover, most spatial access studies focus on healthcare availability and accessibility, they often neglect important transportation barriers such as cost, insecurity, and infrastructure quality. This study aims to address these limitations by examining how various transportation barriers (e.g., network density, insecurity) impact healthcare visitation, leveraged through a mobile-based trajectory big data.
3. Data and methods
This section discusses the data preparation process and the application of the RF regression method to assess the impacts of transportation and socio-economic features on healthcare visits. Fig. 1 illustrates the framework of the study which outlines all stages leading to the results section.

Download: Download high-res image (683KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Study framework.

The following sections start by discussing the process of generating the dependent variable, followed by the process of generating independent variables, the process of joining data to hexagonal tessellations, and the modeling stage.
3.1. Dependent variable generation
The primary data for this analysis consists of mobile-based trajectory data for the year 2021 in the City of Dallas, including cities of University Park and Highland Park, which is provided by the Azira company (Azira, 2021). The aim of this study is to infer patterns of healthcare visits across the City of Dallas and to define a Healthcare Visit Index (HVI) for different areas. According to Fig. 1, a series of steps are needed to calculate the index. The primary step of the analysis is time aggregation. Each data point in the trajectory data is a ping location from a cellphone device identified by an anonymized user ID for every five seconds alongside the time and location coordinates. To reduce the data volume and dimensions, these pings are aggregated into 1-hour increments. Next, unique IDs without a minimum of 600 h of data per month, equivalent to on average around 80 % of available hours in a month, are deleted to clean the data of inconsistent instances. Furthermore, the hexagonal grid in which the resulting IDs are stationary from 1 am to 4 am for 70 % of days in a month was captured to identify their home locations. This time window of 1 am to 4 am is commonly used in similar studies to determine home locations, as it aligns with typical sleeping hours when individuals are most likely to be stationary (Hu et al., 2016, Makris et al., 2023, Tong, 2015). Identified home locations for each unique ID are shown in Fig. 2.

Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Sample home locations and real population density.

As shown in Fig. 2, the city is divided into hexagonal tessellations of 1 square kilometer in area each. This approach allows for a uniform shape and size coverage for the city, better data representation, and an increased dimensionality for later modeling stages. The home detection algorithm resulted in 52,274 unique IDs residing within the City of Dallas. The spatial distribution of home locations of the data, signified as black dots on the map, showed a good representation of the real population density of the city, signified in color codes, which is obtained from American Community Survey data (ACS) (Bureau, 2021). However, to test the accuracy and reliability of the trajectory data, a correlation test was performed between the sample population density, calculated by dividing the number of identified home locations by area of each hexagon, and the real population density of the city in persons per square kilometers. The results suggested that there is an 82 % correlation between sample population density and the real population density, suggesting that the home detection algorithm provides a reasonably accurate representation of the actual population distribution in the city.
The next stage determined healthcare visits made by the 52,274 unique IDs across the city. For this purpose, the locations of hospitals and community care clinics (e.g., women, infant, and child clinics) in the City of Dallas were collected from the City of Dallas Open Data portal (Dallas OpenData, 2024). These locations were used to capture intersections of each unique ID throughout the year within the geofenced boundary of a given hospital or clinic. Previous studies have used circular buffers around the points of healthcare locations with radii of different sizes (Jing et al., 2023, Kong et al., 2017, Sun et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2021b). However, to increase the accuracy, this study considered parcels of each healthcare facility as a geofenced area, given that parcels better represent boundary of facilities compared to circular buffers. These parcels are used to track the instances where a unique ID intersects with a healthcare polygon for a minimum of 1 h to capture one healthcare visit made by that particular ID number. Furthermore, unique IDs with more than 115 h of healthcare visits per month were classified as workers and excluded from the dataset, allowing the focus to remain on healthcare visitors. The 115-hour threshold represents two-thirds of the average monthly working hours, which is 173.33 h.
Ultimately, the number of healthcare visits by each ID is joined to the hexagonal tessellation where the identified home location of the associated ID is located. Consequently, a healthcare visit index (HVI) is defined for each tessellation using the following equation:
(1)
Where 
 is healthcare visit index for hexagon j, 
 is number of visits by person i at hexagon j, and 
 is the sample population in hexagon j. The index above represents average visits or visits per sample population to healthcare facilities.
Fig. 3 further shows the location of healthcare facilities in the city and an enlarged view of the Methodist Dallas Medical Center as an example of one healthcare facility within the city. Also, a process of calculating HVI is illustrated in the figure.

Download: Download high-res image (761KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Location of healthcare facilities and HVI calculation process.

It should be noted that healthcare facilities are not limited to hospitals and community care clinics; they also include other types of facilities such as doctor’s offices, dialysis centers, and specialized clinics. However, this study focused on hospitals and community care clinics because they provide general healthcare services to a broader populace, regardless of healthcare needs. In contrast, facilities like dialysis centers primarily serve specific groups with particular healthcare demands, making their utilization more directly tied to healthcare demand rather than access. Including such specialized facilities would require a robust consideration of demand. Additionally, including doctor’s offices presents a unique challenge due to the healthcare visit detection applied to the mobile trajectory data in this study. Many doctor’s offices are located within larger buildings or occupy individual floors, making it difficult to accurately geofence these locations and track visits. As a result, only visits to hospitals and community care clinics located in stand-alone buildings are considered in this study.
Ultimately, the calculated HVI for each hexagon served as the dependent variable in this study. However, due to the right-skewed distribution of HVI, a log transformation was applied to normalize it. To avoid taking the logarithm of zero in cases with 0 healthcare visits, a small constant (i.e., 1 × 10−6) was added to all values before applying the log transformation. In the subsequent modeling process, all hexagons with a population of 0 or a sample population below 5 were removed to ensure the reliability of the analysis. Hexagons with a sample population below this threshold were considered insufficient to provide meaningful or representative data for the modeling process.
3.2. Independent variable generation
This study used a series of independent variables to investigate impacts on HVI from each hexagonal tessellation. These variables were divided into two main categories: transportation factors and socio-economic factors.
The transportation category includes transportation-related factors, that according to the literature, either create or remove barriers to healthcare for residents, depending on whether their values are higher or lower. The first two factors in this category are ‘drive time to healthcare’ and ‘transit time to healthcare’. These factors are calculated for each hexagon using network analyst tools in ArcGIS Pro application. The required network dataset in this study is also created in ArcGIS Pro, using the street network data obtained from Dallas Open Data Portal and the General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) data collected from Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) (DART, 2021), which is the transit agency in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex in Texas. The travel times were calculated from the centroid of each hexagon to the nearest healthcare facility within the city. It is important to note that this calculates drive time and transit time to the nearest healthcare facility examining how the presence of nearby healthcare is associated with visitation. However, individuals may choose facilities that are further away for reasons such as service availability, quality of care, or personal preferences. While more comprehensive spatial accessibility methods, such as 2SFCA methods or gravity-based models, might provide a broader representation of healthcare access, calculating these measures was beyond the scope of this paper. Thus, travel times and transit times to the nearest healthcare facility are the primary analysis variables in this study.
Next, several transportation infrastructure density factors were derived from the smart location mapping dataset by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (US EPA, O. 2023). These factors included ‘pedestrian network density’, ‘road network density’, ‘multi-modal network density’, ‘walkability score’, ‘frequency of transit’, and ‘percentage of the population living in 0 vehicle households’. Finally, two transportation-barrier factors of ‘transportation cost burden’ and ‘traffic fatalities per 100,000 people’ were derived from the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) Equitable Transportation Community (ETC) Explorer (USDOT, 2024a).
The socio-economic category included seven distinct variables from the 2017–2021 American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year estimate data to provide demographic and economic context. The mobile trajectory data used in this study was anonymized and did not include individual identifiers, only the location of anonymized trajectory data over time. Socioeconomic variables were used to approximate population characteristics and to complement the dynamic mobile trajectory data. The first three variables were racial factors - percent white, percent Black, and percent Hispanic origin. It should be noted that racial demographic variables included in this analysis were selected because these groups represent the majority population in the City of Dallas. Although other racial demographics, such as Asian, American Indian and Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander are reported in census data, they represent only 3.5 %, 0.5 %, and 0.1 % of the city’s total population, respectively. Furthermore, across the city’s hexagonal grid system, no areas were identified where these groups comprised more than 50 % of the population. For these reasons, the analysis focused on the racial and ethnic categories forming the majority population of the city and thus likely capturing the most meaningful patterns of disparity within the city.
The next three variables were related to the health insurance status of the population including percent population with Medicaid, percent population with Medicare, and percent population with two or more insurance. The final variable in the socio-economic category was the median household income. Although these variables are static proxies and differ from the dynamic nature of mobility data, they offer an understanding of the potential socioeconomic characteristics of anonymized trajectory IDs. This approach has been used in previous studies to integrate static socio-economic factors with dynamic mobility data to address transportation-related challenges (Lee et al., 2021).
Table 1 presents a descriptive summary of all variables in the dataset including, mean, standard deviation, and source of each variable.
Table 1. Descriptive summary of statistics.

Variable	Description	Mean	S.D.	Source
HVI	Healthcare visit index (dependent variable)	0.67	1	Authors
Transportation
Drive time	Drive time to nearest healthcare facility (min)	10.27	14.42	EPA Smart Location Dataset (US EPA, 2023)
Transit time	Transit time to nearest healthcare facility (min)	47.33	38.19
Pedestrian network density	Network density in terms of facility miles of pedestrian-oriented links per square mile	12.86	7.36
Road network density	Network density in terms of facility miles of all road links per square mile	18.59	8.45
Multimodal network density	Network density in terms of facility miles of multi-modal links per square mile	3.62	3.08
Walkability	Walkability index calculated by EPA	8.17	4.51
Transit frequency	Aggregate frequency of transit service per square mile	20.34	38.38
% 0-vehicle	Percent population living in 0-vehicle households	7.91	7.62
Transportation cost burden	Transportation cost burden calculated by CEJST tool	1.12	5.00	ETC Explorer (USDOT, 2024a)
Traffic fatalities	Traffic fatalities per 100,000 people	33.78	54.67
Socio-economic
% white	Percent white population	52.88	22.69	ACS (Bureau, 2021)
% Black	Percent Black population	25.04	22.40
% Hispanic	Percent Hispanic population (i.e., all races with Hispanic origins)	41.13	25.73
% Medicaid	Percent population with only Medicaid insurance	10.79	8.52
% Medicare	Percent population with only Medicare insurance	0.40	1.19
% two insurance	Percent population with two or more insurance type	1.35	2.34
Income	Median household income (USD)	66,524.80	43,251.67
3.3. Joining data to hexagonal tessellations
Data used in this study are available at different spatial levels. For instance, data from the ETC Explorer and CEJST tools are provided at the census tract level, while the EPA’s Smart Location Dataset is available at the census block group level. To standardize spatial units, all data were transformed onto hexagonal grids, consistent with the computed HVI already at the hexagonal level. The hexagonal tessellation ensures uniformity in shape and size across the city, enhances dimensionality for subsequent modeling, and mitigates sampling biases caused by edge effects (Mayaud et al., 2019a, Pereira, 2018).
However, the varying sizes and boundaries of census tracts, block groups, and hexagonal grids cause challenges related to the Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP) (see: Openshaw, 1984). To minimize this issue, a weighted approach is employed based on overlapping areas of polygons. For proportional data and indices (e.g., transportation cost burden, percentage of white population, walkability index), the value for each hexagon is calculated as a weighted average of the overlapping census tracts or block groups, with weights based on the proportion of their area overlapping the hexagon. For example, if 80 % of a hexagon overlaps block group A and 20 % overlaps block group B, the hexagon's value is calculated as (0.8 × value of A) + (0.2 × value of B). For discrete data (e.g., population counts), the value assigned to each hexagon is determined based on the proportion of the census tract or block group area that overlaps the hexagon. Each hexagon receives a portion of the population corresponding to the fraction of the tract's area within its bounds. The total value for the hexagon is then the sum of these proportional contributions from all overlapping tracts or block groups. This approach utilized in previous studies (Mayaud et al., 2019a, Mayaud et al., 2019b) relies on the assumption that spatial attributes are uniformly distributed within census units or hexagons. Despite this limitation, this approach is adopted as the best available solution within the scope of this study.
Ultimately, the independent variables in the dataset went through an outlier removal and normalization process using z-score normalization technique, an appropriate method for this study with variables on different scales. Z-score normalization standardizes variables to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1, which ensures comparability across variables measured on different scales (e.g., transportation cost burden and percentage of racial demographics). Unlike other normalization methods such as min–max scaling which can distort the variability of the data by compressing the range into a fixed interval, Z-score normalization preserves the relative statistical distribution of each variable. It also retains relative relationships within the data which enhances interpretability of feature associations with HVI later in results modeling.
3.4. Modeling
This study uses RF regression to model patterns of healthcare visits from different hexagonal tessellations in the city and further investigates the impacts of transportation and socio-economic factors on them. RF is a robust ensemble learning technique designed for datasets with high-dimensional features (Breiman, 2001) and has been extensively used in previous transportation studies particularly to investigate non-linear effects (Alhomaidat et al., 2022, Bao et al., 2023, Khajavi and Rastgoo, 2023, Pourebrahim et al., 2019). The RF algorithm creates an ensemble of decision trees, where each tree is trained on a random subset of the data, and predictions are made by aggregating the results from all the trees (Breiman, 2001). This technique is known as bootstrap aggregating, or the bagging method (Ruiz et al., 2024). RF allows for effective capture of complex and non-linear interactions between variables that traditional linear models might miss, making it particularly useful for travel behavior analysis (Wang et al., 2022). In RF, overfitting is minimized by averaging the predictions from multiple trees, enhancing the robustness of the model when dealing with imbalanced data (Peng et al., 2024). However, overfitting may still occur under certain conditions, particularly in regression tasks, due to the large number and high-depth trees or when dealing with complex data with many variables (Hastie et al., 2009). One of the key approaches to maximize the performance of an RF model is hyperparameter tuning which can be done through different approaches such as Grid search, Random search, Bayesian optimization, among others (Probst et al., 2019).
In this study, the GridSearchCV method from the scikit-learn package in Python was used to evaluate all possible combinations of specified hyperparameter values through cross-validation. The dataset, consisting of 1038 samples, was split into three subsets: 60 % for training, 20 % for cross-validation, and 20 % for testing. The testing set was fixed using a fixed random state to ensure consistency in the final evaluation. The testing set was reserved exclusively for assessing the generalization performance of the final model, while the training-validation data (80 % of the dataset) was used for hyperparameter optimization. To ensure robustness in the hyperparameter selection process, the grid search procedure was repeated 5 times with different random seeds for splitting the training-validation data into training (60 % of the total dataset) and validation (20 % of the total dataset), a method also used in previous studies (Choi et al., 2023). This iterative process ensured that the selected hyperparameters consistently performed well across different training-validation splits. GridSearchCV starts by defining a grid of hyperparameters, which includes different values for n_estimators (number of trees in the forest), max_depth (maximum depth of each tree), min_samples_split (minimum number of samples required to split a node), and min_samples_leaf (minimum number of samples required to be at a leaf node). The method systematically evaluates all combinations of these hyperparameters using a five-fold cross-validation to assess the model's performance with each set of parameters. The scoring parameter is set to the R-squared metric (R2) to evaluate model performance. Once all combinations are evaluated, GridSearchCV identifies the set of hyperparameters that yields the best performance on the validation set, as indicated by the highest R-squared score. This study tests the following values for each of the hyperparameters:
•
100, 200, 300, and 400 for n_estimators,
•
None, 10, 20, and 30 for max_depth
•
2, 5, 10, and 15 for min_samples_split
•
1, 2, 4, and 5 for min_samples_leaf
These values resulted in 256 total combinations of hyperparameters. For each random seed, all 256 combinations were evaluated using five-fold cross-validation, resulting in 1280 fits per iteration. Over five iterations, this process involved a total of 6400 fits. Results indicated that a n_estimators of 300, a max_depth of 20, a min_samples_split of 15, and a min_samples_leaf of 5 were the optimized hyperparameters.
Furthermore, Table 2 presents the R2, Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the RF model alongside several other regression models, including Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) linear regression, Gradient Boosting Regression (GBR), Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost) Regression, and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) Regression. It should be noted that hyperparameter tuning was performed for each machine learning model listed in Table 2 to ensure a fair comparison. For the GBR and AdaBoost models, parameters such as the number of estimators and learning rates were tuned, while for the KNN model, the number of neighbors were optimized. These tuning processes were carried out using GridSearchCV with five-fold cross-validation on the training and validation datasets, and the best-performing configuration for each model was subsequently evaluated on the independent test set.
Table 2. Performance metrics of regression models.

Model	R2	RMSE	MAE
RF	0.61	3.24	2.19
OLS	0.39	4.18	3.23
GBR	0.58	3.38	2.30
AdaBoost	0.28	4.42	3.7
KNN	0.5	3.67	2.3
According to Table 2, the RF model had the best performance compared to the other regression models, with an R2 of 0.61, adjusted R2 of 0.52, RMSE of 3.24, and MAE of 2.19, all evaluated on the test set. The RMSE of 3.18 and MAE of 2.12 indicate that, on average, the prediction of model deviates from the actual values by 3.18 and 2.12 units, respectively. The RF model also shows a training set R2 of 0.67, possibly suggesting that a small degree of overfitting is occurring. However, a test set R2 of 0.61 indicates that the model is capturing a significant portion of the variance in HVI across hexagonal tessellations.
Ultimately, the marginal impact of each independent variable on the model output is evaluated using the Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) method. SHAP uses game theory to interpret the marginal contribution of features to the output of a machine-learning model (Choi et al., 2024, Rozemberczki et al., 2022) and has been previously applied in transportation studies (Abulibdeh, 2023, Ahmed et al., 2023, Choi et al., 2024, Rezaei and Millard-Ball, 2023, Zhu et al., 2024). Originally introduced by Lloyd Shapley in 1953, SHAP was later developed as a tool for model interpretation and gained attention in the paper by Lundberg and Lee (2017). SHAP assigns each feature an importance value which provides insights into how features influence individual predictions. SHAP values can theoretically range from negative to positive infinity, depending on the model and the feature values. In this study, SHAP values, for each instance of the independent variable, are used to further compare the significance of each feature on healthcare visits.
4. Results and discussion
This section discusses the potential associations between the calculated HVI and transportation and socioeconomic factors listed above, using both descriptive statistics and the machine learning model. The section begins by examining the descriptive patterns of healthcare visits across the city to understand their distribution and initial associations with transportation and socioeconomic factors. Next, results of RF model are presented to understand associations between these factors and the calculated HVI. The analysis then explores how these associations vary across different racial demographics. Finally, the section concludes with policy implications proposed based on study findings. It is important to reiterate that this analysis focused exclusively on hospitals and community care clinics as healthcare facilities. As a result, findings should be interpreted within this context.
4.1. Exploratory data analysis
Fig. 4 shows the total daily number of healthcare visits and its seven-day moving average across the city. The data reveals that the highest number of visits occurred in January, with a noticeable decline in June and July, possibly due to the high temperatures in Dallas. Also, the highest decline was observed in February, possibly due to the 2021 winter storm in Texas.

Download: Download high-res image (632KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Total daily number of healthcare visits.

Furthermore, Fig. 5 illustrates the HVI for each hexagonal tessellation in the city. Initial analysis of the HVI distribution shows that HVI is higher in areas with denser transportation networks. Specifically, road network density and pedestrian network density showed Pearson correlations with HVI of 0.2 and 0.18, respectively. Among socioeconomic factors, income and percentage of white showed the strongest correlations with HVI, at 0.11 and 0.09, respectively. Additionally, HVI was positively correlated with the number of healthcare facilities within a hexagon, with a correlation coefficient of 0.11. In contrast, hexagons farther from healthcare facilities had lower HVI values, as indicated by negative correlations with drive time (−0.14) and transit time (−0.25) from the nearest facility. Moreover, sample population count derived from the home location detection algorithm and actual population data from the ACS both demonstrated positive correlations with HVI, at 0.13 and 0.11, respectively.

Download: Download high-res image (800KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. HVI across hexagonal tessellations.

A more detailed analysis of the associations between independent variables and HVI using machine learning models is provided in the next sections that follow.
4.2. SHAP results
This section presents results of the RF model applied to the dataset with the dependent variable of HVI and independent variables in transportation and socio-economic categories.
Fig. 6 presents a summary plot of the SHAP values for each variable in order of their importance while highlighting the range of associations for each feature with the model predictions. Each point on the plot represents a SHAP value for a particular feature and instance. Plots show how much a feature contributed to pushing the model prediction higher or lower. The color gradient from yellow to purple indicates the feature value from low to high.

Download: Download high-res image (333KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. SHAP summary plot.

According to the figure, pedestrian network density has the strongest positive association with model predictions. High values (in purple) generally aligned with higher predicted healthcare visits, as shown by SHAP values greater than zero. Conversely, low pedestrian network density values (in yellow) are associated with negative SHAP values, which correspond to fewer predicted healthcare visits.
Interestingly, results suggest that transit time is more strongly associated with higher predicted HVI compared to drive time, as evidenced by the wider spread of SHAP values. Higher transit times (represented by purple dots) are linked to negative SHAP values, suggesting that longer transit times may correspond to lower predicted healthcare visitation. In contrast, shorter transit times (in yellow) are associated with positive SHAP values, indicating a potential relationship between better public transportation accessibility and increased predicted healthcare visits. Drive time also shows a similar pattern where high drive times have a negative association with HVI, but a more balanced distribution of SHAP values around zero indicates are more modest association with the model’s prediction compared to transit time. Traffic fatalities follow similar patterns, where lower traffic fatality rates are associated with higher predicted healthcare visits. SHAP values for road network density and multimodal network density also show a positive relationship with increased HVI, with high SHAP values for both variables mostly on the positive side of the plot. However, multimodal network density shows a more symmetrical spread around zero, indicating a balanced association with the predicted HVI. High SHAP values for transportation cost burden are linked to negative associations with HVI, suggesting that areas with lower transportation cost burdens align with higher predicted healthcare visits, and vice versa.
Amongst the socio-economic factors, the percent population with Medicaid and median household income were the most significant predictors of HVI. For both variables, higher SHAP values are positively associated with HVI, which further signifies the associations of economic barriers with tendency to visit healthcare. While the income variable shows a more balanced spread, high SHAP values for the percent population with Medicaid have a significantly positive association with the model’s prediction, suggesting that higher Medicaid coverage is linked to an increased likelihood of people visiting healthcare.
Moreover, the percent white and percent Black populations show contrasting associations with HVI. Areas with higher percentages of white residents appear to be associated with increased HVI, whereas higher percentages of Black residents are associated with decreased healthcare visits. This disparity may reflect broader structural inequities, such as differential access to healthcare resources or variations in healthcare-seeking behavior across racial groups. However, it should be noted that these findings might be influenced by residential choice bias where a range of factors such as housing affordability and historical segregation patterns might affect where populations live and ultimately shape the observed associations (Van Wee and Cao, 2022).
Finally, it should be noted that analysis results does not account for variations in healthcare demand. Higher healthcare visits in certain areas may reflect not only improved accessibility but also greater healthcare needs. However, the primary aim of this study is to explore associations between transportation and socioeconomic factors with healthcare visitation patterns. Calculating healthcare demand is complex and involves multifaceted factors beyond the scope of this study (Lee et al., 2024). Without direct measures of demand, such as disease prevalence or individual health data, the observed associations should be interpreted cautiously, as they may be influenced by both access and need.
4.3. Dependencies of transportation with racial demographics
As indicated in the SHAP summary plot results, a higher percentage of white population was associated with an increased HVI, while a higher percentage of Black population was the opposite. To further explore the potential relationship between these findings and transportation factors, Fig. 7 presents four dependence plots that illustrate the interaction of each racial group (white and Black) with the two most significant transportation factors, pedestrian network density and transit time. SHAP dependency plots illustrate the relationship between features and the prediction of model. The plots are divided into quadrants that help interpret the interaction effects between two variables. For instance, points in quadrant A (top left) indicate high feature values with a positive SHAP impact, while quadrant C (bottom right) shows high feature values with a negative SHAP impact. The color gradient represents a secondary feature, such as transit time or pedestrian network density, highlighting how it modifies the primary feature's (% Black or % white population) effect on the prediction of model.

Download: Download high-res image (543KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Dependency plots of transportation with racial factors.

According to dependency plot for percent Black population (plots (a) and (b)), most of the SHAP values are located in quadrant A, where higher SHAP values are associated with lower percent Black population, a finding also highlighted in SHAP summary plot (Fig. 6). However, quadrant B is where percent Black population is high, but SHAP values are also positive. In plot (a), it can be observed that most of the SHAP points in B quadrant have high pedestrian network densities and in plot (b), most of the SHAP points in that B quadrant have low transit times to healthcare. In C quadrants where percent Black population is high and SHAP values are low, most of points with high pedestrian network density and low transit times are closer to the zero line.
The findings above suggest that although areas with a higher Black population percentage generally had lower healthcare visitation rates, those with better transportation accessibility had higher or near-average SHAP compared to the city overall. This also suggests that the lower HVI observed in areas with higher Black populations cannot be attributed solely to demographic factors and transportation barriers play a significant role in those areas.
Dependency plots for percent white population (plots (c) and (d)) also suggest similar findings. In quadrants A and B where the white population is fewer, but SHAP values are higher and lower than 0, most of the positive and near 0 SHAP values show higher pedestrian network density and lower transit times. This finding suggests that while overall areas with higher white population visited healthcare more, areas that had lower white population but better transportation status, also had high healthcare visits.
Furthermore, Fig. 8 illustrates the map of dependencies between the percentage of Black and white populations and the SHAP values for pedestrian network density and transit time. As a reminder, higher SHAP values for a variable indicate a greater association with the model output which is the estimated HVI. In the maps shown in Fig. 8, high SHAP values are defined as those above 0 (positive SHAP values), indicating a positive association with the model's output, while low SHAP values are defined as those below 0 (negative SHAP values), indicating a negative association. For example, if a hexagon has a high SHAP value for transit time variable (areas in blue and dark purple), it means that in that area, accessibility through transit was associated with the estimated average healthcare visits (i.e., HVI), suggesting that the hexagon had good accessibility to healthcare through public transportation.

Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Dependency maps of racial factors with SHAP values of transportation factors.

On the other hand, hexagons with higher percentages of white or Black populations are shown on the map to visualize the dependency of racial factors with the most important transportation factors (i.e., pedestrian network density and transit time to healthcare). A hexagon is considered to have a high Black or white population if more than 50 % of its residents are Black or white, respectively. These maps are designed to help visualize how variations in racial demographics are associated with transportation factors, highlighting areas where these factors play a critical role in accessibility to healthcare facilities.
In map (a), the areas shown in pink represent regions where more than half of the population is Black and have negative SHAP values for pedestrian network density. Areas in dark purple represent regions with a high Black population and high SHAP values for pedestrian network density. As can be seen, only a small number of hexagons have dark purple colors and most hexagons are pink (i.e., high Black population but low SHAP value of pedestrian network density). On map (b) on the other hand, areas that have high SHAP values for transit time and high Black population (i.e., those in dark purple) are much more than those in pink. This suggests that in Black communities, only a few hexagons had good pedestrian network densities associated with higher predicted healthcare visits, whereas a larger number had high SHAP values for transit, reflecting the importance of transit accessibility in those areas.
Looking at maps (c) and (d), it can be observed that number of blue hexagons (i.e., those with low white populations and high SHAP values for pedestrian network density or transit time to healthcare) in map (d) is much higher compared to those in map (c). This suggests that, in non-white neighborhoods, transit accessibility is more strongly associated with increased predicted healthcare visits.
Fig. 9 shows the percentage of positive SHAP values for key transportation and socioeconomic factors across hexagons where the population is more than 50 % white, Black, or Hispanic. Recall that a positive SHAP value for a variable indicates a positive impact on the likelihood of healthcare visits. Thus, a percentage greater than 50 % for positive SHAP values suggests that the majority of hexagons within that racial group are positively associated with the likelihood of healthcare visits.

Download: Download high-res image (357KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Percent positive SHAP values across race groups.

In predominantly white areas, factors such as pedestrian network density (57.48 %), road network density (81.12 %), income (75.17 %), and transportation cost burden have high percentages of positive SHAP values, indicating these factors significantly contribute to increased healthcare visits across white residents. Percent Medicaid showed only below 50 % (34.69 %), suggesting that Medicaid coverage has a less significant impact on increasing healthcare visits in white-majority regions compared to other factors.
Conversely, transit time (70.86 %), drive time (71.52), road network density (54.30 %), and percent Medicaid (64.24 %) are the only prominent factors in Black-majority regions. This suggests that travel time, especially through transit, alongside Medicaid coverage, is positively associated with healthcare visits across Black residents. Transit time showed higher SHAP values for Black residents compared to both white and Hispanic populations, indicating the potential reliance of Black communities on transit access for healthcare visits. On the other hand, factors such as pedestrian network density (22.52 %), transportation cost burden (19.87 %), and income (29.80 %) show low percentages for Black populations as compared to other racial groups. This suggests that these transportation or socioeconomic factors are associated with fewer predicted healthcare visits in predominantly Black areas, potentially reflecting barriers or challenges within these communities.
For Hispanic-majority areas, income (76.94 %), transit time (57.89 %), and multimodal network density (55.64 %) show substantial positive impacts. Interestingly, percentage of Medicaid (71.18 %) is notably higher for the Hispanic group, suggesting healthcare visits are influenced significantly by Medicaid coverage amongst this poupulation. More detailed information on the distribution of SHAP values across race groups can be found in Fig. A1 in the Appendix.
In summary, although a higher percentage of the Black population was associated with fewer healthcare visits, the quality of transportation, particularly shorter transit times to healthcare facilities, is strongly associated with increased healthcare utilization across this group. This analysis provides further evidence in support of improving transportation infrastructure and accessibility to enhance healthcare access and potentially mitigate disparities in healthcare visits across different communities.
4.4. Policy implications
Based on the findings of this study, several recommendations and transportation policy actions are proposed. Enhancing pedestrian and road network density should be prioritized to improve healthcare access, especially in disadvantaged areas. These improvements could be done through programs like the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Reconnecting Communities Program which funds infrastructure projects aimed at improving connectivity in underserved areas (USDOT, 2024b). Similarly, the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) should consider allocating state resources to support improved pedestrian and overall transportation infrastructure in urban areas like Dallas, particularly in marginalized neighborhoods with high transportation barriers.
In addition to improving transportation networks, efforts should also focus on reducing travel times to healthcare. At the federal level, expanding funding for programs such as the Federal Transit Administration’s (FTA) Capital Investment Grants (FTA, 2024), could support the development of high-frequency transit and ridesharing services, particularly where transit-dependent populations experience longer healthcare travel times. At the local level, Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) should focus on optimizing transit routes, increasing service frequency, and enhancing connectivity to healthcare facilities, particularly in transit-dependent areas. Given the city’s sprawling area, DART could expand the service area of its GoLink on-demand microtransit program to provide more flexible and accessible transportation options in areas where expanding fixed route transit may not be feasible.
Reducing transportation costs should be another policy priority, particularly for disadvantaged populations, as highlighted by the significance of transportation cost burden in the results. Federal and state initiatives could include expanding programs that fund subsidized fares for non-emergency medical transport. Locally, cities could implement reduced or free transit fares or subsidized microtransit programs for low-income residents, modeled after similar initiatives in other cities such as Flint, MI (Doyle, 2021) and Holmes County, MS (Maleki and Smith-Colin, 2023), etc.
Equity-based interventions are also essential to address disparities in transportation quality and healthcare access. Policies should explicitly target socioeconomically disadvantaged areas, as findings suggest that better transportation infrastructure in these regions could potentially mitigate healthcare barriers. At the local level, policies encouraging equity impact assessments should be adopted for all major transportation projects to ensure underserved communities benefit directly. Furthermore, the city could establish partnerships with community organizations to identify and address specific local needs, such as improving transportation networks or expanding transit coverage in disadvantaged neighborhoods.
5. Conclusion
Each year, millions of Americans face barriers to accessing healthcare due to a lack of transportation which results in unmet healthcare needs. Such barriers disproportionately affect vulnerable populations such as low-income individuals and those in disadvantaged areas. Without reliable transportation and adequate infrastructure, these groups encounter significant challenges in obtaining timely medical care, leading to worsened health outcomes. Understanding and addressing these multi-faceted barriers is essential for improving healthcare access and equity. Previous research focusing on transportation barriers to healthcare often applied survey-based approaches that gather data from individuals with unmet healthcare needs or conducted spatial analysis studies that identified geographic disparities in healthcare access in an effort to recommend policy actions. However, these methods have limitations, such as inaccuracies in self-reported data, high costs of large-scale surveys, while also often overlooking healthcare access barriers like transportation costs and infrastructure quality. There thus remains a need for more data-driven research that comprehensively examines a full range of transportation barriers affecting healthcare utilization. Consequently, this study used mobile-based trajectories for the year 2021 in the City of Dallas to track healthcare visits and examine their associations with a set of transportation and socio-economic attributes. Results indicated that certain transportation attributes, such as road and pedestrian network density, were positively associated with increased healthcare visits. Conversely, factors like longer transit and drive times to healthcare facilities, traffic fatalities, and higher transportation costs were linked to fewer predicted healthcare visits. Among socioeconomic factors, a higher percentage of white population, higher income levels, and greater Medicaid coverage were associated with increased predicted healthcare visits. Interestingly, while a higher percentage of Black population was generally associated with fewer healthcare visits, this trend differed in areas where transportation quality was high, with these areas showing a positive relationship between transportation quality and healthcare visits.
This research contributes to the existing literature on healthcare access and transportation barriers by offering a deeper understanding of how and to what extent these barriers impact healthcare utilization. Specifically, associations between healthcare utilization and transportation attributes, such as network density and travel times, along with socioeconomic factors, are highlighted. Using mobile-based trajectory data, this study introduces an innovative and data-driven approach to examining healthcare accessibility and transportation barriers to healthcare. The approach used in this study is cost-effective, given its ability to explore transportation and socioeconomic barriers to healthcare access for more than 52,000 individuals in the City of Dallas alone. Traditional approaches to studying transportation barriers often rely on surveys, which are not only expensive to conduct but also limited in scale and prone to sampling biases. In contrast, mobile data provides a more comprehensive view of population-level behaviors at a fraction of the cost, while ensuring accuracy in capturing empirical travel and healthcare visitation patterns.
While the approach used in this study can be employed in other research, it is acknowledged that these results are context-specific and not intended to be generalized beyond the study area. Instead, this study contributes to the existing literature by highlighting that transportation barriers, such as poor network density and longer travel times, play a significant role in limiting healthcare access and should be considered alongside conventional measures of accessibility. While spatial accessibility studies provide critical insights into healthcare access potential, this study highlights the real-world interactions between transportation attributes and healthcare visits. Together, these approaches can offer a more holistic understanding of healthcare accessibility and inform evidence-based interventions. Future studies may seek to investigate healthcare visitation patterns and the effect of transportation barriers in other cities to futher build existing knowledge and expand opportuniites for generalizability.
Despite its contributions, this study had limitations. For instance, some individuals might travel out of county or state for healthcare visits or use other means of healthcare such as telehealth or online consulting. Given the scope of the research and data limitations, it was not feasible to track such information. Furthermore, while 2021 was a valuable year for analysis due to the heightened need for healthcare during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is important to note that many individuals avoided preventive and routine care due to fear of infection. This may have impacted healthcare visitation patterns limiting the representativenss of the findings. Future research should validate these results using data from both pre- and post-pandemic periods to better capture healthcare-seeking behavior. Moreover, this study focuses solely on the transportation barriers at the origin of trips, while barriers around the destination and along the route could also influence healthcare visits. Future research should consider these additional barriers to thoroughly assess their impact on healthcare access and utilization. Another important limitation is the absence of metrics for healthcare demand, such as population health data or disease prevalence. Without these metrics, the study focuses on associations between transportation and socioeconomic factors with healthcare visits, which may be influenced by both access barriers and underlying health needs. Future work should consider calculating healthcare demand by incorporating related data to better explore the effects of access and need on healthcare visitation patterns.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mohammad Maleki: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Janille Smith-Colin: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.