Abstract

Previous studies evaluating the social equity of transit-based accessibility to healthcare have failed to consider travel time uncertainty by assuming that transit always operates exactly as scheduled. Their analyses, therefore, tended to ignore travellers’ efforts to avoid being late to their healthcare appointments. These conventional approaches might overestimate accessibility and lead to inaccurate evaluations of social equity. This study aims to investigate how overlooking travellers’ risk-management efforts under travel time uncertainty might result in flawed assessments of equity in transit-based accessibility to healthcare facilities. Specifically, we compare the traditional accessibility approach to the robust space–time accessibility (RSTA) method, which considers travellers’ risk-management strategies (e.g., leaving early, choosing routes based not only on travel time but also travel time variability) depending on whether they are risk-neutral or risk-averse under travel time uncertainty. The RSTA model provides a more conservative, realistic, and user-centred view of transit-based accessibility. To demonstrate this, we conducted an empirical study of Columbus, Ohio, USA, using real-time transit big data. Our results show that traditional measures of accessibility that do not consider the impact of travel time uncertainty cannot accurately capture the social and racial inequity in healthcare accessibility via transit. However, the RSTA method reveals significant inequity in transit-based healthcare accessibility among residents in terms of their socio-economic and demographic status. Moreover, the conventional accessibility method evaluates the new bus rapid transit (BRT) service as promoting the accessibility of disadvantaged people, which the robust accessibility method revealed is not true.
Introduction

The importance of social equity in healthcare accessibility – ensuring that individuals can easily access health-shaping resources – cannot be overstated (Neutens, 2015, Penchansky and Thomas, 1981). Research indicates that sub-standard levels of healthcare accessibility can hinder regular clinic visits (Graves, 2008), reduce the use of preventive services (e.g., annual health check-ups) (Fujita et al., 2017), and contribute to chronic and severe health outcomes such as hypertension (Okuyama et al., 2019) and pediatric asthma (Garcia et al., 2015). The COVID-19 pandemic has further underscored the significance of equitable access to healthcare. Studies have suggested that insufficient spatial access to health resources, including testing sites (Mullachery et al., 2022), vaccination sites (D. Liu et al., 2022b), ICU beds (Kang et al., 2020), and medical care (Palm et al., 2021), can exacerbate inequality and inequity in health outcomes.
A key component for achieving social equity in healthcare access is equitable access to healthcare through public transit (Boisjoly et al., 2020) as it is often the primary mode of transportation for socially disadvantaged groups in both the Global North (D. Liu et al., 2022a, Zimmerman, 2005) and South (Sharma and Patil, 2021, Syed et al., 2013) to reach healthcare services. To support evidence-based planning that promotes equity in transit-based access to healthcare, it is crucial to measure accessibility as accurately and realistically as possible. However, many existing studies (El-Geneidy et al., 2016, Farber et al., 2014, Grisé et al., 2019, Kapatsila et al., 2023, Klar et al., 2023, Pereira, 2019, Pereira, 2018, Pereira et al., 2019, Singh et al., 2022, Widener et al., 2015) on transit accessibility are based on unrealistic assumptions (Malekzadeh and Chung, 2020). They often assume that public transit operates perfectly on-time, which is far from reality (L. Liu et al., 2022c, Wessel et al., 2017, Wessel and Farber, 2019). Additionally, most studies presume that transit riders have a single routing objective such as reaching their destinations as quickly as possible through the fastest path. These assumptions can be particularly problematic when measuring healthcare accessibility under travel time uncertainty because travellers may choose alternate routes with less variability in travel time or implement buffer time plans (i.e., leaving early) to avoid being late or missing appointments and incurring late or cancellation fees (Chen et al., 2013, de Palma and Picard, 2005). Addressing travellers’ risk-management behaviours in the face of travel time uncertainty can lead to a more realistic and accurate portrayal of healthcare accessibility and equity.
The overarching goal of this study is to investigate the added value of the robust space–time accessibility (RSTA) method when assessing social equity in public transit access to healthcare under travel time uncertainty. Unlike the traditional accessibility models, the time-geographic RSTA method accounts for transit riders’ risk-management strategies (e.g., buffer time plan, alternate routing choice) based on their risk-taking attitudes (e.g., risk-neutral vs. risk-averse) under travel time uncertainty. We have three objectives. First, using a transit system in the city of Columbus, Ohio, USA, as an example, we will demonstrate how conventional transit accessibility models may overestimate healthcare accessibility by not considering travellers’ diverse risk-management strategies in the face of travel time uncertainty. Second, we will present how this overestimation can lead to an erroneous assessment of social justice in the context of public transit accessibility to healthcare. Lastly, we will examine whether and how neglecting travellers’ heterogeneous buffer time plans and routing strategies for managing risks can distort the evaluation of a new mobility service’s impacts on healthcare access equity.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The next section reviews previous approaches to measuring spatial accessibility to healthcare and measuring accessibility to urban resources under travel time uncertainty. The section also provides background information about the RSTA and traditional accessibility (TA) models which will be used in this research. We then describe our study design, setting, and data sources. In that same section, we also elaborate on how we generated accessibility metrics and conducted social equity analysis. Section 4 reports the results of our analysis. The final section offers a summary, limitations, and policy implications of this study.