Abstract
We examined the mediating role of physical activity on the relationships of walkability with Flemish older adults' health outcomes. In low income neighborhoods, residents of high walkable neighborhoods had a 1.5 kg/m2 lower BMI than low walkable residents. Of this difference 0.3 kg/m2 (19%) and 0.2 kg/m2 (12%) were explained through walking for transport and MVPA, respectively. Similar findings were observed for waist circumference. Walkability did not relate to functional performance or quality of life. Walkable neighborhoods may benefit older adults’ health, especially in low income neighborhoods. More research in other contexts is warranted to confirm current findings.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Seniors Environment Active transport Weight status
1. Introduction
The population of older adults (≥65 years) is rapidly growing worldwide and many of them suffer from chronic diseases (Christensen et al., 2009, Spirduso et al., 2005, Census Bureau, 2014). Regular physical activity (PA) in old age effectively prevents the onset and development of chronic diseases and helps to maintain functional independence and good quality of life (Chodzko-Zajko et al., 2009). However, 60–70% of older adults are currently insufficiently active to obtain cardiovascular and metabolic health benefits (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013, Eurobarometer, 2010, Tafforeau, 2008). Socio-ecological models posit that neighborhood environments can have an important influence on health. According to these models, health behaviors, wellbeing and health result from the level of congruence between people and their surrounding environment. In this way, a neighborhood environment may predispose, enable and reinforce healthy behaviors (Green et al., 1996, Sallis and Owen, 2002, Stokols, 1996). For example, a neighborhood environment that offers easy access to shops may result in walking (rather than driving) being the default option when going for groceries. Neighborhood environments are hypothesized to be especially relevant for older adults' PA since age-related functional limitations may make it more difficult to overcome environmental barriers (e.g., distance to the nearest shop) (Buffel et al., 2012, Rantakokko et al., 2010, Rantakokko et al., 2009, Wahl and Lang, 2003). A frequently studied environmental factor in relationship to PA is the objectively-measured neighborhood walkability index as proposed by Frank and colleagues (Frank et al., 2010b). This walkability index reflects the ease of walking to destinations in a neighborhood and comprises three components; street connectivity, residential density, and land use mix diversity. Neighborhoods characterized by a well-connected street network, high residential density and heterogeneity of land uses (e.g., residential, commercial, institutional) are considered highly walkable. Among US older adults, high walkability was found to relate to higher levels of walking for transport, but not to higher levels of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) (Frank et al., 2010a, King et al., 2011). Among Iranian older adults, living in a high walkable neighborhood was associated with more overall walking (Lotfi and Koohsari, 2011). In the Belgian Environment & Physical Activity Study in Seniors (BEPAS-Seniors), high walkability was found to be associated with more transportation walking in the total sample and with more MVPA in low, but not in high income neighborhoods (Van Holle et al., 2014).
Despite these consistent relationships between walkability and physical activity behaviors, the relationships between walkability and health outcomes are less clear. Among adults, a recent review showed that three out of six studies reported high walkability to be related to a healthier weight status. The remaining three studies showed no significant relationships between walkability and adults’ weight status. Furthermore, the relationships were reported to vary according to gender, study site and measurement methods of walkability and weight status (Grasser et al., 2013). In four other studies among adults higher walkability was shown to be associated with a lower cardio-metabolic risk (Coffee et al., 2013, Glazier et al., 2014, Muller-Riemenschneider et al., 2013, Paquet et al., 2014). Among older adults, two US studies investigated the relationship between walkability and weight status and found high walkability to be associated with a healthier self-reported weight status (Frank et al., 2010a, King et al., 2011). Another study among US older adults also reported high walkability to be associated with a lower prevalence of depression among men, but not among women (Berke et al., 2007). To our knowledge, no previous studies among older adults investigated the relationships between walkability and health outcomes other than self-reported weight status and depression. Furthermore, no studies among older adults explicitly investigated whether the relationships between walkability and health outcomes were mediated through PA. Insights into these mediating relationships can yield important knowledge on how neighborhood walkability can optimally promote health through stimulating PA among older adults.
Using data from the BEPAS-Seniors study, the current study aimed to examine the relationships of walkability with a variety of health outcomes among Flemish older adults. Additionally, we aimed to study the mediating role of PA in these relationships. More specifically, we aimed to examine:
(1)
the total relationships of walkability with BMI, waist circumference, physical performance and physical and mental health-related quality of life (see Fig. 1A) and
Fig. 1
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. We examined the relationships walkability-health outcomes (A) and the mediating role of PA (B).

(2)
the mediating relationships of transportation walking and MVPA in these total relationships of walkability with health outcomes (see Fig. 1B).
In our previous study using BEPAS-Seniors data, the relationship between walkability and MVPA was moderated by neighborhood income. Therefore, we also investigated whether neighborhood income moderated the total relationships between walkability and health outcomes and the mediation analyses (i.e. moderated mediation analyses).
2. Methods
2.1. Procedures
Data were collected as part of the Belgian Environment and Physical Activity Study in Seniors (BEPAS Seniors), which has been described previously in full detail (Van Holle et al., 2014). Briefly, participants were recruited within 20 neighborhoods in Ghent (Belgium). These neighborhoods were selected from the 201 existing statistical sectors. A statistical sector is the smallest administrative unit for which socio-demographic information is available. In Ghent, a statistical sector contains on average 1347 inhabitants. Neighborhoods were selected in two steps. First, statistical sectors were stratified according to objective walkability quartiles. A low walkable neighborhood was defined as a neighborhood in the lowest walkability quartile and a high walkable neighborhood as a neighborhood in the highest quartile. Second, the sectors were stratified on median annual household income. A low income neighborhood was defined as a neighborhood in the second, third, or fourth income decile while a high income neighborhood was defined as a neighborhood in the seventh, eighth, or ninth decile. The first and tenth deciles were excluded to avoid outliers. Walkability and median annual household income were crossed with each other resulting in four neighborhood types: low income/low walkability, low income/high walkability, high income/low walkability, high income/high walkability. Neighborhoods with the most extreme walkability scores (lowest and highest scores for low and high walkable neighborhoods, respectively) were selected for inclusion. To obtain sufficient potential participants/neighborhood, one to five adjacent statistical sectors were combined to constitute one neighborhood. Six neighborhoods consisted of more than one statistical sector resulting in a total of 31 included statistical sectors. Due to lower residential density, low-walkable neighborhoods were in all cases larger than high-walkable neighborhoods.
Contact details and age of all older adults (≥65 years) residing in the 20 selected neighborhoods were obtained from the city's public service department. Stratified sampling based on gender and age (65–74 vs.≥75 years) was used to recruit participants within each neighborhood. Potential participants (1750 in total) were sent a letter that explained the study protocol and were informed that a researcher would visit the older adult at home within the next 14 days to find out about willingness to participate. The researcher made three attempts to find the potential participant at home. Following agreement to participate, an informed consent form was signed (and data collection was started). For inclusion, participants had to be non-institutionalized and physically capable to walk at least a couple of 100 m. The latter was assessed by means of an item included in the RAND SF-36 questionnaire (Haywood et al., 2005, Ware et al., 1994): “How much does your health limit you to walk a couple of 100 m?”. Older adults reporting to be limited a lot were excluded from participation. In total, 1260 older adults were found at home, of which 627 (49.8%) were not willing to participate and 125 (9.9%) were classified as “not eligible for participation due to health limitations to walk a couple of 100 m”. This resulted in 508 participating, yielding a response rate of 44.8% (508/1135 eligible participants found at home). Data were collected by trained researchers between September 2010 and October 2012. To control for seasonal variation, data collection was performed simultaneously in the different types of neighborhoods. The study protocol was approved by the Ghent University Hospital.
The study protocol consisted of two home visits. During the first visit an interview assessed health-related quality of life and PA. The participant also received an accelerometer to wear during the next seven days. During a second home visit, approximately eight days after the first visit, an interview assessed socio-demographics, height, weight, waist circumference and functional performance were measured objectively and the accelerometer was collected.
2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Socio-demographics and residential self-selection
The following socio-demographics were assessed to act as covariates: age (years), gender, educational level, marital status and number of motorized vehicles in the household. Years living at the current address was assessed for descriptive purposes. Residential self-selection was assessed using an eight-item scale adapted from Frank et al. (Frank et al., 2007) and acted as a covariate. Participants were asked to respond on a five-point Likert scale (ranging from completely unimportant to very important) how important eight possible reasons were for selecting their neighborhood. The items were: (1) proximity of open spaces, (2) public transit, (3) shops and services, (4) recreational facilities, (5) family and friends living nearby, (6) easy to walk/having to drive the car less frequently, (7) sense of community and (8) safety from crime. Internal consistency of the scale in the current sample was good (Cronbach's alpha=0.83).
2.2.2. Independent variable: Objective neighborhood walkability
The construction of the neighborhood walkability index has been described previously in full detail (Van Dyck et al., 2010). Briefly, this walkability index included data on residential density, street connectivity and land use mix diversity derived from cadastral (including residential land use, street centerline and zoning data) and census data which were integrated using Geographical Information System (GIS). Residential density was obtained from the ratio of residential units to the land area devoted to residential use. Connectivity was calculated by dividing the number of true intersections (3 or more streets) by the land area. Land use mix represented the degree of diversity of land use types in each neighborhood. Five land use types were considered: residential, retail (supermarkets, bakeries, butchers, banks, and clothing shops), office, institutional, and recreational. A normalized score ranging between 0 and 1 was calculated; a score of 0 indicated single use and 1 indicated a completely even distribution of the five land uses (i.e., each land use type occupied 20% of the total floor area). A z-score was calculated for each of the three components and a walkability index was calculated; walkability=(2*z-connectivity)+(z-residential density)+(z-land use mix) (Frank et al., 2010b). This walkability index was computed for each of the 201 statistical sectors in the city of Ghent. Only older adults residing in neighborhoods in the top and bottom walkability quartiles were recruited for this study, representing residents of high and low walkable neighborhoods, respectively.
2.2.3. Moderator: Neighborhood income
Neighborhood median annual household income data were provided by the Belgian National Institute of Statistics (2008). To avoid outliers, sectors with annual household income values less than €11,600 (Euro) and greater than €116,000 were not included. The second, third, and fourth deciles of the ranking were defined as low SES neighborhoods; the seventh, eighth, and ninth deciles as high SES neighborhoods (Van Dyck et al., 2010).
2.2.4. Mediating variables: Walking for transport and accelerometer-derived MVPA
To assess walking for transport, the interview-version of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (long, last seven days) was used. Participants were asked to report the frequency and duration of walking for transport during the last seven days. Consecutively, they reported the intensity at which they walked; at a high, moderate or low pace. Only walking at a moderate and high pace was included in our measure of walking for transport since walking at a low pace is not classified as moderate- to vigorous-intensity PA (Ainsworth et al., 2011). Weekly minutes of walking for transport was calculated by multiplying the reported number of days by the duration of walking for transport on such a day.
To assess accelerometer-derived MVPA, participants were instructed to wear an Actigraph GT3X+ accelerometer during seven consecutive days. Participants were asked to wear the accelerometer on the right hip during waking hours, but to remove the device during bathing activities or contact sports. Accelerometers were initialized and data downloaded using ActiLife version 6.0, data were cleaned using MeterPlus version 4.3. Data registration occurred in one minute epochs. Twenty-eight participants had no accelerometer data due to device failure. A period of at least 90 min of consecutive zeros was defined as non-wear time (Choi et al., 2012). A valid day was defined as a day that contained at least 10 h of accelerometer data and participants with less than five valid days were excluded from further analyses (n=25) (Cerin et al., 2012, Grimm et al., 2012). Participants with more than 18 valid hours/day were also excluded since this may indicate that the accelerometer was not removed at bedtime (n=6). This resulted in the inclusion of 449 participants with complete accelerometer data with a mean of 15.0±1.4 valid hours/valid day. Since there is no consensus about an accelerometer cut point defining MVPA among older adults, we chose to construct two accelerometer-derived MVPA measures based on the two most frequently used cut points; Freedson MVPA (≥1952 counts per minute) (Freedson et al., 1998) and Copeland MVPA (≥1041 counts per minute) (Copeland and Esliger, 2009). Minutes with less than 100 activity counts were defined as sedentary minutes (Evenson et al., 2012). Daily sedentary time was used as a covariate in all analyses.
2.2.5. Outcome variables: BMI, waist circumference, physical performance and physical and mental health-related quality of life
To calculate BMI (kg/m2), height and weight were measured with a SECA 214 stadiometer and a SECA 813 Robusta weight scale up to 0.1 cm and 0.1 kg, respectively. Prior to these measurements, participants were asked to remove their shoes and only wear light clothing. Waist circumference was measured with a SECA 201 anthropometric tape at the narrowest circumference of the waist (midway between the lower rib margin and the iliac crest) with participants breathing out gently. Participants were in standing position and wore no heavy outer garments. Waist circumference was measured three times up to 0.1 cm with the median value being used in the analyses.
To assess physical performance, the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) was used, including three tests of lower extremity functioning: repeated chair stands, balance (side-by-side, semi-tandem and tandem position) and a 3 m walking test (Guralnik et al., 1994). For each test a categorical score ranging from 0 to 4 was created. A summary score for physical performance was obtained by summing the three categorical scores, resulting in a score ranging from 0 to 12 with higher scores denoting better physical performance (Guralnik et al., 1994).
Health-related quality of life was assessed using an interview-version of the validated RAND SF-36 questionnaire (Haywood et al., 2005, Ware et al., 1994). Scoring of the RAND SF-36 questionnaire was performed according to established guidelines available on 〈http://www.rand.org/health/surveys_tools/mos/mos_core_36item.html〉. The RAND SF-36 includes 36 items and eight scales. Based on these eight scales, two summary scores were calculated; a physical and mental health summary score. Physical and mental health-related quality of life were calculated using the weights (i.e. the coefficient scores) obtained from a factor analysis using alpha factoring with oblique rotation (direct oblimin, delta=0) for a two-factor solution (Farivar et al., 2007, Hays and Morales, 2001, Kaiser and Derflinger, 1990). These weights were obtained through the regression method (See Appendix 1) (Field, 2005). Participants' scale scores were multiplied with the corresponding weights and these eight products were then summed to obtain a physical and mental health-related quality of life summary score. Hence, each scale was included in both the physical and mental health-related quality of life summary score, but with a different weight. Both summary scores were transformed into a T-score (mean=50, standard deviation=10).
2.3. Statistical analyses
2.3.1. R packages, missing data and data transformations
Analyses were performed using R version 3.1.1 with statistical significance defined at 0.05. The overall relationships between walkability and health outcomes were analyzed using multilevel linear regression analyses (random intercept models) to adjust for clustering of participants within neighborhoods using the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2014). For the mediation analyses, multilevel mediation analyses (random intercept models) were performed using the lme4 and mediation package (Imai et al., 2010, Tingley et al., 2014).
The mediation package can only handle cases with complete data and participants with missing data on any of the involved variables were omitted from the analyses. This resulted in an analytic sample of 391 participants for all analyses. This analytic sample did not differ significantly from the original sample in demographic, PA and health outcome variables.
Currently, the mediation-package does not accommodate multilevel mediation analysis for mediating or outcome variables with gamma variance function (to deal with skewed continuous variables). Based on skewness and visual inspection of QQ-plots, walking for transport, Freedson and Copeland MVPA and physical and mental health-related quality of life were found to be non-normally distributed. The outcome variable ‘walking for transport’ was highly positively skewed and contained an excess of zero's (228 of the 391 or 58.3% of participants reported no walking for transport). Since such a distribution cannot be transformed into an approximately normal distribution, this variable was dichotomized into: no walking for transport (coded ‘0’) and at least some walking for transport (coded ‘1’). To improve normality of Freedson and Copeland MVPA and physical and mental health-related quality of life, a box-cox transformation was applied using the powerTransform function of the car-package (Fox and Weisberg, 2011). The following power transformations were used for Freedson and Copeland MVPA and physical and mental health-related quality of life; 0.44, 0.38, 3.04 and 3.12, respectively. Consecutively, transformed Freedson and Copeland MVPA variables were multiplied by 100 and physical and mental health-related quality of life were divided by 100 to obtain regression estimates with an absolute value ranging between 0 and 1000. The transformed variables were used in all subsequent analyses. However, for descriptive purposes, means and standard deviations of the normally distributed variables and medians and quartiles of the originally non-normally distributed variables are presented.
2.3.2. Analyses of the overall relationships between walkability and health outcomes
To analyze the total relationship between walkability and health outcomes, a multilevel linear regression model including the main effects of neighborhood walkability and income and their interaction effect was fitted for each health outcome. These models were adjusted for age, gender, educational level, marital status, number of motorized vehicles, residential self-selection and accelerometer-derived sedentary time. Restricted Maximum Likelihood was used to obtain parameter estimates.
2.3.3. Mediation analyses
To perform the mediation analyses, two models were fitted for each health outcome using the lme4 package; (1) the mediator model estimating the relationship between walkability and the mediating PA variable (hence, the three mediator models are the same for the five health outcomes) and (2) the outcome model estimating the relationship between the mediating PA variable and the health outcome while adjusting for walkability (Imai et al., 2010). Both models were adjusted for neighborhood income, the interaction effect neighborhood walkability*income, age, gender, educational level, marital status, number of motorized vehicles, residential self-selection and accelerometer-derived sedentary time. Models including accelerometer-derived MVPA were adjusted for number of valid days and average valid hours/valid day. If an interaction effect with p<0.10 was observed between neighborhood walkability and income in the mediator or outcome model, this interaction effect was retained in both models and a moderated mediation analysis was performed. All continuous variables were centered on their grand mean. Multilevel linear regression analyses were performed for all mediator and outcome models, except for the mediator models with walking for transport as dependent variable for which multilevel logistic regression analyses were performed. Multilevel linear regression analyses were estimated using Restricted Maximum Likelihood, multilevel logistic regression analyses were estimated using the Laplace approximation. If there was no significant relationship between walkability and the mediating variable or between the mediating and outcome variable, no mediation analysis was performed.
Based on the results of the mediator and outcome model, the mediate-function of the mediation-package estimates the mediating relationship, i.e. the indirect relationship between walkability and the health outcome via the PA variable. The software also estimates the direct relationship between walkability and the health outcome. Additionally, the proportion mediated (indirect relationship/total relationship) is calculated. However, this proportion should not be interpreted in instances of inconsistent mediation. Inconsistent (or suppressed) mediation occurs when a significant mediating relationship (in the hypothesized direction) is accompanied by a non-significant total relationship. This can be explained by an (unobserved) counteracting mediator. This counteracting mediator has an opposite relationship with the outcome variable and, thus, cancels out the first mediation relationship resulting in a non-significant total relationship (MacKinnon et al., 2007). Cerin and MacKinnon (2009) provided the following example to illustrate inconsistent relationships. An intervention may increase physical activity levels (hypothesized mediator) but not result in a decrease in BMI (no total relationship) because the participants compensated their increased physical activity level by increasing their energy intake (counteracting or inconsistent mediator). Likewise, high walkability may relate to higher PA levels which in turn relates to better health, but when high walkability also relates to more fast food consumption, this might eliminate the beneficial effect of being more physically active. Bias corrected and accelerated bootstrapping (sims=8000) was used to obtain 95% confidence intervals (Tingley et al., 2013).
3. Results
3.1. Descriptive characteristics of the sample
Participants had a mean age of 74±6 years and 54% were women (see Table 1). Most participants (66%) were married or cohabiting and 38% had followed tertiary education. Median years living at current address was 33 (quartile 1 (Q1)-quartile 3 (Q3)=17–44). Participants accumulated a mean of 581±99 minutes/day of accelerometer-derived sedentary time. Most participants (58%) did not report any walking for transport in the last seven days. Participants accumulated a median of 275 (Q1–Q3=205–334) minutes/day of total PA. According to the cutpoints of Freedson and Copeland, participants accumulated a median of 10 (Q1–Q3=3–24) and 41 (Q1–Q3=19–66) minutes/day of MVPA, respectively. Based on the Freedson cutpoints, participants accumulated a median of 257 (Q1–Q3=192–307) minutes/day of light-intensity physical activity and 0 (Q1–Q3=0–0) minutes/day of vigorous-intensity physical activity. Only 52 of the 391 participants accumulated some vigorous-intensity physical activity illustrating that more intense forms of PA are scarce among older adults. Participants had a mean BMI of 23±4 kg/m2 and a mean waist circumference of 95±13 cm. Participants averaged 9±2 out of 12 on the short physical performance battery. A median of 53 was observed for the outcome variables physical (Q1–Q3=45–57) and mental (Q1–Q3=46–57) health-related quality of life. Descriptives of the untransformed mediator and outcome variables according to neighborhood walkability and income are presented in Table 2.
Table 1. Descriptive characteristics of the analytic sample (n=391).

Characteristics	Empty Cell
Age (years, M±SD)	74.3±6.2
Gender (% women)	54.2
Marital status (%)	
 Widowed	22.3
 Never married / divorced	12.3
 Married / cohabiting	65.5
Educational level (%)	
 Primary education	27.4
 Secondary education	34.8
 Tertiary education	37.9
Number of motorized vehicles (M±SD)	1.0±0.6
Years living at current address (Med; Q1–Q3)	33.0 (16.8; 44.3)
Accelerometer-derived sedentary time (M±SD)	580.8±98.6
Walking for transport (Med; Q1–Q3)	0.0 (0.0; 11.4)
Accelerometer-derived MVPA Freedson (Med; Q1–Q3)	10.1; 3.3–24.3
Accelerometer-derived MVPA Copeland (Med; Q1–Q3)	40.7; 19.0–65.9
BMI (kg/m2, M±SD)	22.5±3.7
Waist circumference (cm, M±SD)	95.0±13.0
Short physical performance battery (/12, M±SD)	8.7±2.2
Physical health-related quality of life (Med; Q1–Q3)	52.8 (45.2; 57.1)
Mental health-related quality of life (Med; Q1–Q3)	52.7 (45.5; 56.9)
M=mean, SD=standard deviation, Med=median, Q1=quartile 1, Q3=quartile 3.
Variables that were non-normally distributed were described by their median and quartile 1 and 3 values.
All physical activity and sedentary behaviors are expressed in minutes/day.
Table 2. Descriptives of the mediator and outcome variables according to neighborhood income and walkability.

Empty Cell	Low income	High income
Empty Cell	Low walkable (n=97)	High walkable (n=92)	Low walkable (n=102)	High walkable (n=100)
Walking for transport (% having walked for transport)	24.7	59.8	28.4	55.0
Freedson MVPA (Med; Q1–Q3)	7.0 (1.7; 13.9)	17.6 (5.5; 31.9)	10.1 (3.9; 18.5)	12.9 (3.0; 26.6)
Copeland MVPA (Med; Q1–Q3)	31.3 (11.4; 51.9)	50.5 (21.0; 68.1)	41.4 (21.8; 69.3)	42.6 (19.0; 70.9)
BMI (kg/m2, M±SD)	23.1±4.0	22.3±3.7	21.8±3.2	22.3±3.7
Waist circumference (cm, M±SD)	100.1±13.2	92.8±12.8	93.7±11.0	92.3±12.9
Short physical performance battery (/12, M±SD)	8.4±2.4	8.6±2.1	8.7±2.2	9.0±2.2
Physical health-related quality of life (Med; Q1–Q3)	50.4 (43.7; 56.0)	53.5 (45.2; 57.6)	53.4 (49.2; 57.8)	53.0 (43.4; 57.0)
Mental health-related quality of life (Med; Q1–Q3)	51.4 (45.2; 56.3)	53.3 (43.6; 58.5)	53.1 (48.0; 56.5)	51.8 (43.3; 56.9)
M=mean, SD=standard deviation, Med=median, Q1=quartile 1, Q3=quartile 3.
Variables that were non-normally distributed were described by their median and quartile 1 and 3 values.
Freedson and Copeland MVPA are expressed in minutes/day.
3.2. Total relationships between walkability and health outcomes
For the total relationship between walkability and BMI, a significant interaction effect between neighborhood walkability and income was found (see Table 3). In low income neighborhoods, participants living in a high walkable neighborhood had a BMI that was 1.5 Kg/m2 (S.E.=0.6, p=0.02) lower than those living in low walkable neighborhoods. In high income neighborhoods, there was no significant difference in BMI between high and low walkable neighborhoods (B=0.6 kg/m2, S.E.=0.6, p=0.34).
Table 3. Total relationships between walkability and health outcomes.

Health outcomes	Walkability (ref.=low)	Walkability ⁎ income (ref.=low)
Empty Cell	B (S.E.)	B (S.E.)
BMI	−1.5 (0.6)⁎	2.1 (0.9)⁎
Waist circumference	−7.9 (2.5)⁎⁎	6.9 (3.6) †
Physical performance	−0.1 (0.5)	0.4 (0.7)
Physical health-related quality of life	148.5 (165.4)	−305.5 (236.5)
Mental health-related quality of life	178.4 (273.2)	−399.9 (396.0)
Ref.= reference category, S.E.= standard error.
†
p< 0.10,
⁎
p< 0.05,
⁎⁎
p< 0.01.
For the total relationship between walkability and waist circumference, a borderline significant interaction effect with neighborhood income was observed. In low income neighborhoods, high walkability was associated with a 7.9 cm (S.E.=2.5, p<0.01) lower waist circumference. In high income neighborhoods, walkability was not associated with waist circumference (B=−0.9 cm, S.E.=2.6, p=0.7).
In both low and high income neighborhoods, there were no total relationships of walkability with physical performance and physical and mental health-related quality of life.
3.3. Mediation analyses for the relationships of walkability with health outcomes
The mediator models, representing the relationships between walkability and the three PA variables, are the same for the five health outcomes (see Table 4). For walking for transport, the interaction effect between neighborhood walkability and income was not significant (O.R.=0.7, 95% C.I.=0.3; 1.8). In both high and low income neighborhoods, participants living in a high walkable neighborhood had 3.1 (95% C.I.=1.9; 4.9) times higher odds to have walked for transport than those living in a low walkable neighborhood. This is illustrated by the percentages of participants that have walked for transport in low vs. high walkable neighborhoods (see Table 2). In low income neighborhoods, 24.7% of participants living in low walkable neighborhoods reported to have walked for transport in comparison to 59.8% of participants living in high walkable neighborhoods. A comparable difference was observed in high income neighborhoods. Based on this, mediation analyses with walking for transport could be performed in both high and low income neighborhoods.
Table 4. Results of the mediation analyses for BMI.

Empty Cell	Walking for transport	Freedson MVPA	Copeland MVPA
Mediator modela			
 Walkability (ref.=low)	3.6 (1.8; 7.0) d, ⁎⁎⁎	5.6 (1.6; 9.6)⁎⁎	27.2 (2.4; 52.0)⁎
 Walkability ⁎ income (ref.=low)	0.7 (0.3; 1.8) d	−5.0 (−10.5; 0.6)†	−27.9 (−61.5; 5.7)†
Outcome modelb	−1.0 (−1.8; −0.3)⁎⁎	−0.03 (−0.06; −0.001)⁎	−0.0003 (−0.005; 0.005)
Mediating relationship			
 Low income	−0.3 (−0.6; −0.1)⁎	−0.2 (−0.4; −0.002)⁎	
 High income	−0.2 (−0.5; −0.03)⁎		
Direct relationshipc			
 Low income	−1.2 (−2.5; 0.1) †	−1.2 (−2.5; −0.001)⁎	
 High income	0.8 (−0.5; 2.1)		
% mediated			
 Low income	19.0 (1.6; 101.5)⁎	11.6 (−1.2; 63.2) †	
 High income	Inconsistent mediation		
All models were adjusted for neighborhood income, age, gender, educational level, marital status, number of motorized vehicles, residential self-selection and accelerometer-derived sedentary time. Models with accelerometer-derived PA were adjusted for number of valid days and average valid hours/valid days.
†
p< 0.10,
⁎
p< 0.05,
⁎⁎
p< 0.01,
⁎⁎⁎
p< 0.001.
a
In the mediator model the relationship between walkability and the mediating PA variable was estimated.
b
In the outcome model the relationship between the mediating PA variable and physical health-related quality of life was estimated.
c
The direct relationship represents the relationship between walkability and BMI that is not mediated through the PA variable.
d
Odds ratio and 95% confidence interval presenting the relationship with the odds of having walked for transport in the last seven days.
Table 5. Results of the mediation analyses for waist circumference.

Empty Cell	Walking for transport	Freedson MVPA	Copeland MVPA
Outcome modela	−3.6 (−6.1; −1.2)⁎⁎	−0.1 (−0.2; −0.03)⁎	−0.002 (−0.02; 0.01)
Mediating relationship			
 Low income	−1.0 (−2.0; −0.2)⁎⁎	−0.7 (−1.6; −0.1)⁎	
 High income	−0.7 (−1.6; −0.1)⁎		
Direct relationshipb			
 Low income	−6.8 (−12.0; −1.8)⁎⁎	−6.9 (−11.8; −2.1)⁎⁎	
 High income	−0.1 (−5.5; 5.1)		
% mediated			
 Low income	12.3 (2.7; 39.2)⁎⁎	8.8 (1.0; 30.0)⁎	
 High income	Inconsistent mediation		
All models were adjusted for neighborhood income, age, gender, educational level, marital status, number of motorized vehicles, residential self-selection and accelerometer-derived sedentary time. Models with accelerometer-derived PA were adjusted for number of valid days and average valid hours/valid days.
†p< 0.10,
⁎⁎⁎p< 0.001.
⁎
p< 0.05,
⁎⁎
p< 0.01,
a
In the outcome model the relationship between the mediating PA variable and physical health-related quality of life was estimated.
b
The direct relationship represents the relationship between walkability and BMI that is not mediated through the PA variable.
For Freedson and Copeland MVPA, a trend towards a significant interaction between walkability and income in the mediator model was observed. Walkability was positively related to Freedson and Copeland MVPA in low, but not in high, income neighborhoods. Therefore, mediation analyses with Freedson and Copeland MVPA could only be performed in low income neighborhoods.
3.3.1. Mediation analyses for the relationship of walkability with BMI (see Table 4)
In the outcome model for walking for transport, a significant interaction effect (B=2.0 kg/m2, SE=0.9, p=0.03) between walkability and income was observed and, therefore, a moderated mediation analysis was performed. In low income neighborhoods, a significant mediating relationship was observed; living in a high walkable neighborhood was associated with a 0.3 kg/m2 lower BMI through walking for transport. This mediating relationship accounted for 19% of the total relationship between walkability and BMI. In other words, of the difference of 1.5 kg/m2 between low and high walkable neighborhoods (total relationship, see Table 3) 0.3 kg/m2 (or 19%) was explained through walking for transport. In high income neighborhoods, a significant mediating relationship was observed; high walkability was related to higher odds of walking for transport and walking for transport was negatively related to BMI. This resulted in living in a high walkable neighborhood being associated with a 0.2 kg/m2 lower BMI through walking for transport. Since there was no total relationship between walkability and BMI in high income neighborhoods, this is an inconsistent mediation. Such an inconsistent mediation suggests that there are other pathways through which walkability relates to BMI that offset this beneficial relationship between walkability and BMI through walking for transport.
In low income neighborhoods, a significant mediating relationship was observed for Freedson MVPA; living in a high walkable neighborhood was associated with a 0.2 kg/m2 lower BMI through Freedson MVPA. This accounted for 11.6% of the total relationship between walkability and BMI. In other words, of the difference of 1.5 kg/m2 between low and high walkable neighborhoods (total relationship, see Table 3) 0.2 kg/m2 (or 11.6%) was explained through Freedson MVPA.
In the outcome model, Copeland MVPA was not significantly related to BMI, hence, it could not mediate the relationship between walkability and BMI.
3.3.2. Mediation analyses for the relationship of walkability with waist circumference (see Table 5)
In the outcome model for walking for transport, a trend towards significance for the interaction effect (B=6.7 cm, SE=3.6, p=0.06) between walkability and income was observed and, therefore, a moderated mediation analysis was performed. In low income neighborhoods, a significant mediating relationship was observed; living in a high walkable neighborhood was associated with a 1.0 cm lower waist circumference through walking for transport. This accounted for 12.3% of the total relationship between walkability and waist circumference. In other words, of the difference of 7.9 cm between low and high walkable neighborhoods (total relationship, see Table 3) 1.0 cm (or 12.3%) was explained through walking for transport. In high income neighborhoods, a significant mediating relationship was observed; living in a high walkable neighborhood was associated with a 0.7 cm lower waist circumference through walking for transport. Since there was no total relationship between walkability and waist circumference in high income neighborhoods, this is an inconsistent mediation.
In low income neighborhoods, Freedson MVPA significantly mediated the relationship between walkability and waist circumference; living in a high walkable neighborhood was associated with a 0.7 cm lower waist circumference through Freedson MVPA. This accounted for 8.8% of the total relationship between walkability and waist circumference. In other words, of the difference of 7.9 cm between low and high walkable neighborhoods (total relationship, see Table 3) 0.7 cm (or 8.8%) was explained through Freedson MVPA.
To facilitate interpretation of the above described findings, Fig. 2 presents the levels of walking for transport (untransformed), Freedson MVPA (untransformed), BMI and waist circumference according to neighborhood income and walkability.
Fig. 2
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Walking for transport (untransformed), Freedson MVPA (untransformed), BMI and waist circumference according to neighborhood income and walkability.

In the outcome model, Copeland MVPA was not significantly related to waist circumference, hence, it could not mediate the relationship between walkability and waist circumference.
3.3.3. Mediation analyses for the relationships of walkability with physical performance and physical health-related quality of life (see additional files 2 and 3)
In the total sample, walking for transport significantly mediated the relationship of walkability with physical performance and physical health-related quality of life. Since there were no total relationships of walkability with functional performance and physical health-related quality of life, these were inconsistent mediations.
In low income neighborhoods, the relationships of walkability with physical performance and physical health-related quality of life were significantly mediated through Freedson and Copeland MVPA. Since there were no total relationships of walkability with physical performance and physical health-related quality of life in low income neighborhoods, these were inconsistent mediations.
3.3.4. Mediation analyses for the relationship of walkability with mental health-related quality of life (see additional file 4)
In the outcome models, none of the three potential mediators were significantly related to mental health-related quality of life, hence, no mediation analyses were performed.
4. Discussion
The added value of the current work is that it is the first study among older adults investigating (1) the relationships between walkability and health outcomes other than self-reported weight status and depression, (2) the mediating relationships of physical activity in walkability-health relationships and (3) walkability-health relationships outside the US. High walkability was shown to be related to a healthier objectively measured BMI and waist circumference among older adults living in low, but not in high, income neighborhoods. Walkability did not relate to physical and mental health-related quality of life and physical performance.
In low income neighborhoods, living in a high walkable neighborhood was related to a 1.5 kg/m2 lower objectively measured BMI of which 0.3 kg/m2 (or 19%) and 0.2 kg/m2 (or 12%) was explained through walking for transport and Freedson MVPA, respectively. Likewise, high walkability was related to a 7.9 cm lower waist circumference of which 1.0 cm (or 12%) and 0.7 cm (or 9%) was explained through walking for transport and Freedson MVPA, respectively. This adds to the existing literature showing a consistent link between high neighborhood walkability and higher levels of physical activity among older adults (Frank et al., 2010a, King et al., 2011, Lotfi and Koohsari, 2011). Our finding that this link with increased physical activity also translates into a healthier weight status, at least in low income neighborhoods, may offer additional support for convincing policy makers to provide walkable neighborhoods. Residents of low income neighborhoods are at increased risk for morbidity and mortality (Meijer et al., 2012, Pickett and Pearl, 2001). Therefore, it is a promising finding that high walkability relates to better health through higher levels of physical activity, especially in low income neighborhoods. Older adults living in low income neighborhoods might rely more heavily on neighborhood resources than their peers living in high income neighborhoods because of lower levels of car ownership or lower financial capacity to pay a sports club membership. However, our findings are in contrast with findings among US older adults for which high neighborhood walkability was associated with more MVPA and a lower self-reported BMI independent of neighborhood income (King et al., 2011). The limited number of studies about the relationships between walkability and health outcomes and the apparent differences between continents illustrate the need for more research concerning this topic. Furthermore, future research is needed to confirm whether neighborhood walkability is more important for the health of older adults residing in low vs. high income neighborhoods.
Freedson MVPA and walking for transport only partially explained the relationship between walkability and BMI and waist circumference in low income neighborhoods (proportions mediated ranged from 8.8% to 19.0%). This suggests that there are other mediators by which walkability positively affects weight status. Example of such mediators may be motorized transport (Ding et al., 2014, Frank et al., 2010a, McCormack and Virk, 2014, Sugiyama et al., 2013) or access to a variety of food (Chung et al., 2012). Freedson MVPA, but not Copeland MVPA, was significantly related to BMI and waist circumference. This suggests that MVPA based on the Copeland cut point of 1041 counts/min (compared to 1952 for Freedson MVPA) includes activities that are not intense enough to lead to sufficient energy expenditure to have an impact on BMI or waist circumference. This is in line with findings among US older adults by Buman et al. (Buman et al., 2010) who reported MVPA based on the Freedson cut point to be more strongly related to BMI compared to high-light PA (defined as activities in between 1041 and 1952 counts/min). In line with this, during exploratory analyses we created a variable ‘transportation walking’ that did include walking at light intensity (at a low pace), but this variable did not relate to any of the health outcomes. Therefore, walking at light intensity was excluded from our final measure of transportation walking, which did relate to the health outcomes (with exception of mental health-related quality of life). These findings seem to contradict some recent studies showing that higher levels of light-intensity physical activity relate to better health outcomes among older adults (Bann et al., 2015, Buman et al., 2010, Loprinzi et al., 2015, Osuka et al., 2015). More research examining the relationships between light-intensity physical activity and older adults’ health outcomes is warranted. It should also be noted that only 52 of the 391 participants accumulated some vigorous-intensity physical activity which indicates that more intense forms of PA are scarce among older adults. This is in line with previous research (Arnardottir et al., 2013, Davis and Fox, 2007).
The majority of the mediations were observed to be inconsistent. This may indicate that there are other unobserved mediating variables that negatively affect health outcomes in high walkable neighborhoods. Possibly, there might be better access to restaurants in high income/high walkable neighborhoods which might lead to their older residents eating out-of-home more frequently compared to those living in high income/low walkable areas. Eating out-of-home more frequently has been related to weight gain and an increased risk of becoming overweight or obese (Nago et al., 2014). Furthermore, Van Dyck et al. (Van Dyck et al., 2011) found neighborhood satisfaction to be lower in high compared to low walkable neighborhoods among Belgian adults. This was partially explained by higher perceptions of esthetic-related problems, pollution, crime and less overall safety in high compared to low walkable neighborhoods. Future research should examine the mediators that negatively affect the relationships between walkability and health outcomes to develop strategies aimed at reducing these negative effects.
Strengths of the current study include its focus on health outcomes and mediating mechanisms, which is necessary to reveal and understand the possible relationships of neighborhood walkability not only with PA but also with health outcomes. A second strength is the objective measurement of MVPA, BMI, waist circumference and functional performance. Third, since there is no consensus about which accelerometer cut points to use to accurately measure older adults' MVPA, the two most commonly used cut points were included in the current study. However, there are also other procedures concerning accelerometer use in older adults (e.g., definition of non-wear time) which are still under debate in the literature. For example, we excluded six participants with more than 18 h of accelerometer registration/day since we considered this indicating accelerometer registration during sleeping time. These participants indeed had much higher volumes of sedentary time than the included participants (900 vs. 581 min/day). Daily accelerometer wear time of the included participants ranged from 11.1 to 17.9 h/day with a median of 15.1b h/day. Assuming an average sleeping time of 8 h/day and removal of the accelerometer during bathing, these figures illustrate that participants complied well with the accelerometer protocol. Furthermore, the analyses were statistically adjusted for number of valid days and average valid hours/valid day. Future research may use an accelerometer diary to identify and include data from a time window when the accelerometer was actually worn. More research is needed to obtain consensus about the recommended procedures when using accelerometry to objectively measure older adults’ physical activity. The current study is limited by its cross-sectional design, which prevents us from inferring causality. The assumed causal influence of walkability on PA variables is erroneous if participants with a preference for PA self-select themselves into high walkable neighborhoods. Therefore, our analyses were adjusted for residential self-selection (Boone-Heinonen et al., 2011, McCormack and Shiell, 2011). Furthermore, although there is good evidence for the causal influence of PA on weight status, quality of life and functional performance (Chodzko-Zajko et al., 2009), these health outcomes may also causally influence PA behaviors (Baert et al., 2011, Koeneman et al., 2011). The assumption of sequential ignorability is a strong assumption in ‘causal’ mediation analysis and could be tested in a sensitivity analysis. However, such a sensitivity analysis is not yet implemented for multilevel mediation models in the statistical software (Tingley et al., 2014). Longitudinal research is needed to confirm the temporal sequence of (1) walkability, (2) physical activity, and (3) health outcomes assumed in the current study. Another limitation of the current study is that other potentially relevant mediators, such as dietary factors and perceptions of safety from crime and pollution, were not included. Since energy expenditure is only one side of the energy balance equation, future studies hould include diet when studying the relationships between neighborhood walkability and BMI/waist circumference. A recent systematic review on the relationships between the physical environment and adult weight status indicated that some studies investigated physical activity behaviors but very few examined dietary mediators (Mackenbach et al., 2014). This calls for true multidisciplinary research teams including not only PA researchers, health geographers, urban and transportation planners, but also food scientists. The inclusion of additional mediators is also necessary to shed light on the inconsistent mediations observed in the current study. This will require studies to assess a multitude of variables and to apply very complex statistical analyses (i.e., multilevel multiple mediation analysis or multilevel structural equation modeling). Furthermore, the current study only included residents from low and high income neighborhoods and, therefore, our findings cannot be generalized to residents from “medium” income neighborhoods. It should also be acknowledged that during the long time period that our participants resided in their neighborhood (median=33 years), median neighborhood incomes may have changed. Consequently, individual and neighborhood socio-economic status may not correspond. We adjusted our analyses for individual socio-economic status (i.e., educational level), but further research is needed to disentangle the role of and the interplay between individual and neighborhood-level socio-economic status on older adults’ physical activity levels. To be included in this study participants had to be non-institutionalized and able to walk a couple of hundred meters. Therefore, participants in this study had a certain degree of mobility and were all able get around in their neighborhood. However, almost half of our participants (46.9%) reported that they were limited a lot to perform vigorous activities (such as running, lifting heavy objects and participating in strenuous sports). Unfortunately, we do not have any data on comorbidities that might influence participants’ ability to engage in these vigorous activities. Our sample was higher educated (38% vs. 16% with tertiary education) (Belgian Federal Government, 2013) and had a lower BMI (a mean of 23 vs. 26 kg/m2) (Drieskens et al., 2013) than the population of Flemish older adults. Lastly, following the recommendations by Fritz and McKinnon (Fritz and MacKinnon, 2007), our sample size may have been too small to perform a moderated mediation analysis. However, when examining the differences in physical activity levels and health outcomes between the different types of neighborhoods (see Table 2 and Fig. 2), it appears that all relevant differences between the different types of neighborhoods did yield a significant estimate in the mediation analyses. Research in larger samples, other regions and among less educated and less healthy older adults is necessary to confirm current findings.
To conclude, the current study contributes to the existing literature by showing that high neighborhood walkability relates to a healthier objectively-measured BMI and waist circumference among Belgian older adults residing in low income neighborhoods. This could be explained partially by higher levels of MVPA and walking for transport. However, despite the positive relationships between neighborhood walkability and physical activity, neighborhood walkability did not relate to other health outcomes. Future research is warranted to confirm current findings and to examine the mechanisms through which walkability might negatively affect health offsetting the positive effects through increased physical activity. These studies should also include dietary factors to gain more comprehensive insights into the relationships between neighborhood walkability and weight status. This is necessary to inform policy and planning on how to design walkable neighborhoods that optimally promote older adults' health.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
JVC (11N0313N) and VVH (1103113N) were supported by a PhD Fellowship – Research Foundation Flanders (FWO). DVD (FWO12/PDO/158) was supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship – Research Foundation Flanders (FWO).