Abstract
Noise and health guidance to date have focused on the direct links between noise and health outcomes such as annoyance, sleep disturbance, cardiovascular and metabolic disease, and cognitive impairment in schoolchildren. However, noise is a psychosocial stressor, and there are individual studies showing that exposure to noise or the self-reported responses to noise may affect health through interactions with the wider determinants of health and well-being including physical activity, use of green spaces and social interactions. Despite this emerging evidence concerning potential impacts of noise on the wider determinants of health, literature in the field remains dispersed and unsynthesised. This study seeks to synthetize evidence on different relationships between transportation noise, self-reported responses to noise and the wider determinants of health using a systematic review methodology. The search was conducted in Medline, PsycINFO, PubMed, and Scopus on articles published from 2000 to 2017. This led to the review of 76 papers which satisfied the inclusion criteria. Despite strong heterogeneity in the studies' methodologies and indicators used, there is some evidence that noise exposure and responses to noise such as annoyance and disturbance are associated with people's lifestyle, recreational activities as well as the local economy of the neighbourhood. On the other hand, there are some wider determinants of health, mainly those related to the built and natural environment, which modify the relationship between noise exposure and self-reported responses to noise. In particular, greenness, having access to quiet areas, and covering noise sources either visually or acoustically with natural features seems to decrease people's negative responses to noise. Results indicate that transportation noise has the potential to affect health through various pathways, and a holistic approach is needed to capture all the effects.
Graphical abstract
Unlabelled Image
Download: Download high-res image (131KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Wider determinants of healthTransportation noiseNoise annoyanceNoise-health interactions
1. Introduction
1.1. Health effects of noise
Noise is a significant public health problem. The World Health Organisation (WHO) categorises noise as being the second biggest environmental contributor to ill health in Western Europe with 1.6 million healthy life years lost each year in urban areas across Europe (WHO, 2011). It is recognised that noise exposure can cause annoyance and sleep disturbance (Basner and McGuire, 2018; Guski et al., 2017). Furthermore, long term exposure to some types of transportation noise may lead to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and metabolic effects as well as cognitive impairment in children (Clark and Paunovic, 2018; van Kempen et al., 2018). However, causal links between noise and health outcomes have been difficult to establish due to the complex physiological and psychological pathways by which noise affects health (ENNAH, 2013; COMOTI et al., 2019; Röösli et al., 2017).
Unlike many other environmental hazards, noise is a psychosocial stressor commonly linked to negative emotional reactions, mental stress, activity disturbance and memory and concentration problems (Tzivian et al., 2015; Stansfeld et al., 2000; den Boer and Schroten, 2007). It is hypothesised that noise exposure causes annoyance which may lead to physiological and psychological stress responses in some individuals (Stansfeld and Matheson, 2003; Babisch, 2002). This is a non-auditory pathway, functioning via emotional and cognitive perception of sound in the cortical and sub­cortical structures, including the limbic region (Babisch, 2002). In this pathway, the negative perception of the sound acts as a psychosocial stressor and activates self-regulatory mechanisms which may lead to physiological and psychological effects such as cardiovascular and metabolic effects as well as depression and anxiety (Hahad et al., 2018).
Research has shown that the extent of the self-reported annoyance due to noise is not only influenced by the noise level but by many other elements such as personal, attitudinal, contextual and social factors (Job, 1988; Guski, 1999; Marquis-Favre et al., 2005; Vos, 2010). Therefore, considering the Babisch (2002) non-auditory pathway model and the effect that some factors have on the psychological response to noise, our understanding is that noise plays a role in influencing physical and mental health through the psychological pathway, but that the response to noise can also be modified by other non-acoustic factors.
1.2. Noise and the wider determinants of health
Wider determinants of health include a diverse range of social, economic, and environmental factors which impact people's health and well-being. These factors are generally interconnected with one another as shown in Fig. 1. Noise is an environmental attribute of the neighbourhood that can have an impact on different determinants of health through multiple direct and indirect pathways. Although current guidance from the WHO mainly focuses on direct links between noise levels and health end-points such as annoyance, sleep disturbance, cognition, birth outcomes, cardiovascular and metabolic effects (Basner and McGuire, 2018; Guski et al., 2017; van Kempen et al., 2018; Clark and Paunovic, 2018; Nieuwenhuijsen et al., 2017), it is becoming evident that noise, through indirect pathways, may have wider impacts on people's health and well-being. For example, recent studies have shown that transportation noise may be associated with lifestyle factors such as smoking or engaging in recreational activities (Roswall et al., 2017a; Roswall et al., 2017b). Self-reported noise perception of traffic noise was also found to influence the way people walk along busy roads or the likelihood of moving house (Brink, 2011; Hamersma et al., 2015; Franěk, 2013). This evidence suggests that although noise is a determinant of health related to the environment on its own, it can also interact negatively with other determinants of health such as lifestyles or behaviours. Some other wider determinants of health have also shown to modify the noise exposure-response relationships. For instance, the area characteristics or features of the built environment such as having a quiet side in the property or having access to green areas in the neighbourhood were shown to reduce noise annoyance (Dzhambov and Dimitrova, 2014; de Kluizenaar et al., 2011).
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (423KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Wider determinants of health diagram from Barton and Grant (2006) - Reprinted from “A health map for the local human habitat” by Barton and Grant, 2006, The Journal for the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, 126 (6). pp. 252–253. 2006 SAGE Publications on behalf of Royal Society for Public Health. Reprinted with permission.
Despite the emerging evidence concerning potential associations and modification effects between noisy environments and people's wider determinants of health, literature in this field remains dispersed and unsynthesised. There is, therefore, a need to identify and synthetize the evidence about the associations and modification effects between noise and the wider determinants of health to complement the recent noise and health WHO's systematic reviews (WHO, 2018). This information could then be used to create social and physical environments that promote good health, identify effective interventions to reduce the adverse health effects of noise as well as areas where new research is needed.
1.3. Present study
In order to delve deeper into this topic, we conducted a review of published studies investigating different relationships between transportation noise, self-reported response to noise and a set of selected wider determinants of health (i.e. lifestyle, community, local economy, activities, built environment, natural environment, and global ecosystem). In this review we focus on self-reported responses such as annoyance, disturbance or other responses linked to the appraisal or perception of noise rather than on physiological responses to noise because the wider determinants of health selected have a psychosocial dimension closer to mental health and well-being outcomes. There are many different direct and indirect pathways in which the wider determinants of health shown in Fig. 1 can be linked with noisy environments. In this review, we focus on addressing two main questions:
•
Is there any association between the selected wider determinants of health (Table 1) and transportation noise, either measured by noise levels or by self-reported responses to noise?
•
Are there any wider determinants of health that have a modifying effect on people's self-reported response to transportation noise?
The wider determinants of health we are focussing in the review are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Description of wider determinants of health selected for this review.
Wider Determinant of Health	Description
Lifestyle	Studies that investigated transportation noise in relation to lifestyle behaviours such as diet, smoking, alcohol use, and physical activity.
Community	Studies that investigated the effects of transportation noise on social or community capital such as community networks, cohesion and engagement.
Local Economy	Studies that investigated the impact that transportation noise has on the economic efficiency of an area. This may include impact on property prices, tourism, and wealth creation among others.
Activities	Studies that investigated the impact of transportation noise on people's activities such as learning, moving, living, playing or shopping.
Built Environment	Studies that investigated transportation noise in relation to features of the neighbourhood such as housing, transport networks and urban design characteristics. Urban parks are included in this category as we consider that are part of the urban neighbourhood design.
Natural Environment	Studies that investigated noise in relation to natural features of the environment, and the availability of large green and open spaces outside the urban area. National parks or big extensions of land were classified as features of the natural environment.
Global Ecosystem	Studies that investigated noise in relation to climate change, sustainability, and meteorological factors.
2. Methodology
2.1. Search strategy for the identification of studies
A structured literature search was conducted with the assistance of professional reference librarians. The databases queried were Medline, PsycINFO, PubMed, and Scopus. The search was restricted to journal papers written in English published between 2000 and 2017. The time frame was selected to ensure that the evidence reflects current neighbourhoods. The search strategy was developed to achieve a high probability of hits on potentially relevant studies. Our study aimed to capture the determinants of health described in Table 1, therefore a broad set of search terms was used. Barton and Grant's “health map” (Fig. 1) was used to frame the keywords of the search strategy.
The search focussed on studies that investigated associations and interactions between transportation noise, self-reported response to noise (i.e. annoyance, disturbance or any other responses linked to the appraisal or perception of noise) and the selected determinants of health described in Table 1 (Fig. 2). Initially, we searched all the possible combinations A + B, A + C and A + B + C shown in Fig. 2. However, the combination of these three permutations resulted in a very large number of papers (> 8000) which were unmanageable due to limited resources. Therefore, after conducting several tests to find the best balance between sensitivity and specificity it was decided to take the A + B + C final set of papers. This combination identified relevant studies for our research questions with a good balance between comprehensiveness and maintaining relevance. Specific combinations of keywords used for the search are described in the supplementary material.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (217KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Review search concept.
2.2. Inclusion Criteria and Selection Process
After the systematic search, studies were selected for inclusion following a specific process. Firstly, the titles of all the records were checked by two authors (EP and BF). Then abstracts were read by one author (EP). Potentially relevant papers were then retrieved and checked by two authors (EP, BF), and screened against detailed inclusion criteria. The inclusion criteria were established following the PICOS framework (Perestelo-Pérez, 2013):
•
Type of participants: Adults (i.e. the study doesn't focus on a specific group of people such as the elderly, children, vulnerable, etc.). Children were included only for the investigation between learning and noise in residential settings.
•
Type of studies: Empirical studies presenting novel data or re-analysed data written in English and published in peer-reviewed journals.
•
Type of outcome measurements: Studies which investigated the three types of outcomes illustrated in Fig. 3. Those are studies which investigated the direct effect between transportation noise (either using noise data or self-reported responses to noise) and the wider determinants of health specified in Table 1, the studies that investigated the direct effect of the wider determinants of health specified in Table 1 on the self-reported response to transportation noise, and any modifying effect of the wider determinants specified in Table 1 on the noise exposure – self-reported response to noise relationship (See Fig. 3). The type of relationship included was determined by the type of wider determinant of health.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (446KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Type of outcome measurements synthetized in this review.
•
Type of designs: Quantitative and qualitative.
•
Context: Studies investigating people in the residential environment. Studies investigating noise outside the living setting were included when those were related to recreational activities in natural settings (i.e. national parks) or laboratory studies investigating the response to natural features which could be translated to the residential setting. Wider determinants of health related to the built environment such as architectural or building features of individual houses (e.g. building materials, indoor setting, window location etc.) were excluded. For studies selected under the local economy category, stated preference studies on hypothetical situations were not included.
A list of the papers that were excluded after full review, with a brief description of the reasons for exclusion, is available in the supplementary file.
2.3. Overall Search Results
Fig. 4 illustrates the literature search process. The literature search returned 2281 records after excluding duplicates automatically with the referencing software. From those records, papers not written in English, duplicates not picked by the referencing software and easily identifiable irrelevant papers were removed. This resulted in 1474 papers for which the titles were screened by two reviewers (EP/BF) and were either retained for the next stage of the review or excluded. The full abstracts of the retained papers were read by one reviewer (EP), who selected, according to the inclusion criteria, the potentially relevant papers for full review. When necessary, during this process, the second reviewer (BF) was consulted. In total, 211 papers met our inclusion criteria and were retained for a full text review. A further 3 articles were identified outside the search. A list of the papers at each stage is available in the supplementary file.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (210KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Flow diagram of study selection process
2.4. Data Extraction and Quality Assessment
Data extraction and quality assessments forms were developed by the authors to provide a standardised format to collect and assess the information. Data extracted included study population, study design, noise source, noise indicator, measures of response, relationship between the wider determinant of health and noise/noise response and conclusion. Due to the broad range of study types, a quality assessment check list was developed specifically for this review based on several standardised quality checklists used for social, clinical and environmental studies such as Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (CASP), National Institute for Health Care Excelence (NICE), Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN50) and Center for Evidence-Based Management (CEBMa) (Higgins and Green, 2011; CASP, 2017; NICE, 2012; SIGN, 2017; CEBMa, 2018). Some of the questions from these checklists were adapted to fulfil the needs of this review. The quality checklist used for evaluating the studies is available in the supplementary file. The data extraction and quality assessments were completed by two authors (EP/BF) and are also available in the supplementary file.
3. Results
A total of 76 papers have been included in this review. Due to the large variation in study characteristics such as different noise sources, different study designs, different noise descriptors and different response measures, it was not possible to conduct a meta-analysis. Therefore, a narrative synthesis was conducted. The results found in each of the domains from the wider determinants health map is presented in this section. The papers that tackled more than one wider determinant of health domain have been analysed and reported into more than one section. Table 2 shows a summary of the relationships investigated in the papers found for each theme.
Table 2. Summary of the relationships found in the review.
Domain	Sub-category	Association with noise exposure	Association with self-reported response to noise	Effect modifier on the exposure-response relationship	Outcome variable of relationship
Lifestyle	Physical activity	x	x		Physical Activity
Use of medication	x	x		Use of medication
Smoking	x			Smoking
Alcohol consumption	x			Alcohol consumption
Community	Home moving	x	x		Home moving
Community interaction	x	x		Community interaction
Activities	Learning	x			Learning
Traveling within the neighbourhood		x		Traveling within the neighbourhood / self-reported response to noise
Playing and recreation	x	x		Playing and recreation
General living		x		General living
Local economy	Property price	x	x		Property price
Economic link with the source		x		Self-reported response to noise
Area affluence			x	Self-reported response to noise
Built environment	Quiet façades and quiet areas		x	x	Self-reported response to noise
Green/Blue areas		x	x	Self-reported response to noise
Type of housing		x	x	Self-reported response to noise
Neighbourhood layout		x	x	Self-reported response to noise
Odour			x	Self-reported response to noise
Dust			x	Self-reported response to noise
Background noise levels			x	Self-reported response to noise
View to the noise source			x	Self-reported response to noise
Natural Environment	Natural sounds			x	Self-reported response to noise
(noise in) Natural parks/areas		x		Self-reported response to noise
Global ecosystem	Meteorological conditions			x	Self-reported response to noise
3.1. Lifestyle
Ten papers that investigated relationships between noise and lifestyle factors and which satisfy the inclusion criteria are reported in Table 3. These papers examined the effects of noise on (1) physical activity, (2) the use of medication and (3) smoking and alcohol consumption.
Table 3. Associations between, transportation noise, responses to noise and lifestyle factors.
Lifestyle factor	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
Physical activity	• Long term annoyance due to transportation noise found to be linked to decreased physical activity.
• No evidence found linking objective levels of noise and reduced physical activity in terms of time/intensity per week.
• Long term exposure to road traffic noise is negatively associated with initiation and no-cessation of leisure time sports.
• No clear impact found between exposure to railway noise and physical activity or leisure time sports.	Results are consistent for longitudinal and cross-sectional analyses of road traffic exposure. Small number of data for railway and aircraft noise sources. There are differences in the measurement of the physical activity indicators and not all studies have measured the self-reported response to noise. All studies controlled for demographic and socio-economic factors.	Foraster et al. (2016)
Roswall et al. (2017a)
Honold et al. (2012)
Use of medication	• Two studies found no effect of road traffic noise on the use of medication.
• One study found a small but significant increase in the risk of using anxiolytics-hypnotics for nighttime noise levels higher than 55 dB(A) in the least deprived areas.
• One study found a significant increase of sleep medication intake at levels of railway noise starting between 60 and 70 dB Lden.
• One study reports that users of sleeping drugs report more sleep disturbance and less noise annoyance than non-users.	Results are inconsistent but based on both cohort and cross-sectional data. Most of the studies have not looked at the relationship between the self-reported response to noise and medication use. There are differences in the measurement of response and the medication use indicators between studies although the measurement of medication use is mainly based on objective data. Most studies statistically controlled for health, demographic and socio-economic factors.	Bocquier et al. (2014)
Halonen et al. (2014)
Lercher et al. (2010)
Orban et al. (2016)
van den Berg et al. (2014)a
Smoking and alcohol consumption	• Three studies found a positive association between exposure to road traffic noise and smoking habits in cross-sectional analyses although one of these shows that the relationship is only valid for the employed resident's subgroup.
• No studies found an association between changes in smoking or alcohol consumption due to road traffic noise in longitudinal analyses.
• One study found a positive association between exposure to road traffic noise and alcohol consumption.
• One study found no impact between traffic noise and alcohol consumption.
• Railway noise exposure found not to be associated with smoking or alcohol consumption.	Consistent results of a positive association between road traffic noise and smoking habits are based on cross-sectional data although one study out of three has not used noise exposure data in the assessment. A longitudinal analysis shows no association between road traffic noise and change in smoking between baseline and follow-up. Inconsistent results found for alcohol consumption. Most of the studies have not looked at the relationship between the self-reported response to noise and smoking habits or alcohol consumption. There are differences in the measurement of response and the smoking/ alcohol consumption indicators. Studies have controlled for demographic and socio-economic factors.	van Lenthe and Mackenbach (2006)a
Roswall et al. (2017b)
Honold et al. (2012)
a
Does not use noise exposure data.
3.1.1. Physical activity
We identified three articles focussing on noise and physical activity that met our inclusion criteria. Two studies investigated the association between time spent on exercising and residential noise exposure, using both cross-sectional data and longitudinal data and one study only used cross-sectional data. To assess the level of physical activity, Foraster et al. (2016), measured the time and intensity of the physical activity. Honold et al. (2012), measured if subjects had carried out any vigorous activity such as running, sports or dancing in the last two weeks. On the other hand, Roswall et al. (2017a) measured the time and prevalence of participation in leisure time sports, as well as the prevalence of initiating or ceasing sports.
The noise sources under investigation were different among the three studies. Foraster et al. (2016) investigated a combination of road, rail and aircraft noise sources for the longitudinal analysis and the specific three sources road, aircraft and rail for the cross-sectional analysis. Roswall et al. (2017a) and Honold et al. (2012) only focused on road and rail sources.
The main difference between Foraster et al. (2016) and Roswall et al. (2017a) is that the former investigated the association between long term annoyance and physical activity whilst the latter investigated the association between noise exposure and physical activity. Honold et al. (2012) measured the noise appraisal of subjects located in low and high burden blocks, the latter being defined as those blocks that are highly exposed to noise, air pollution and access to green spaces.
Foraster et al. (2016) suggests that there is a small effect between long-term noise annoyance and physical activity. However, the study did not find an effect of noise exposure levels on physical activity. These results agree with Roswall et al. (2017a) who also found no association between long-term exposure to road or railway noise and time spent per week on leisure time sports. Conversely, Honold et al. (2012) found that residents in blocks exposed to high levels of air pollution and noise as well as the ones reporting high perceived noise, are less likely to engage in healthy behaviours such as practising vigorous physical activity. This association was only significant for employed residents.
The self-reported response to noise seems to be important as both Honold et al. (2012) and Foraster et al. (2016) found associations with reduced physical activity, with the later emphasising that effects are observed even at low levels of noise annoyance. Apart from the overall transportation annoyance, Foraster et al. (2016) found that night-time annoyance due to road or aircraft noise was also associated with being less active.
On the other hand, Roswall et al. (2017a) found that there is a small association between long term exposure to road and rail noise and the prevalence of non-participation in leisure time sports for road and rail sources. In addition, it was found a small association between long term exposure to road noise and the prevalence of initiating and ceasing the participation in leisure time sports.
Although the studies considered socio-economic and demographic factors as confounding factors in the models, none investigated the walkability of the areas which potentially could affect the levels of physical activity and participation in sports.
3.1.2. Use of medication
Five studies were found which investigated the relationship between transportation noise and the use of medication. These focused on psychotropic medication such as anxiolytic-hypnotic medication, antidepressants and sleeping drugs. Three of these studies were cohort studies and investigated the use of medication due to noise exposure from road traffic. The medication intake was measured with available data on purchases of medication, prescription registries, or by asking participants to show boxes of medication taken. From those, Orban et al. (2016) and Halonen et al. (2014) did not find any association between use of psychotropic drugs and exposure to road traffic noise measured in day-evening-night noise levels. Only Bocquier et al. (2014) found a small but significant increase in the risk of using anxiolytics-hypnotics for night-time noise levels higher than 55 dB(A) in the least deprived areas. None of these three cohort studies investigated the effect of reporting noise annoyance or sleep disturbance on the use of psychotropic medication.
The effects of railway noise on sleep medication intake were investigated in one cross-sectional study. The study area was a valley with a high proportion of freight trains. The study found a non-linear exposure-sleep medication intake with a significant increase in the probability of sleep medication intake starting between 60 and 70 dB Lden (Lercher et al., 2010).
One cross-sectional study found that users of sleeping drugs report more sleep disturbance and less annoyance due to noise compared to the ones that don't use sleeping drugs (van den Berg et al., 2014).
3.1.3. Smoking and alcohol consumption
Three studies investigating the relationship between noise exposure and smoking or alcohol consumption were identified. These studies covered road and rail traffic noise sources.
van Lenthe and Mackenbach (2006) used a cross-sectional study which investigated the probability of smoking in relation to traffic noise exposure levels. The probability of smoking was found to be higher for people living in neighbourhoods with the highest noise pollution from traffic, even after adjustment of the socioeconomic neighbourhood environment. However, the effect size was small and the noise levels used were not objective levels but only extracted from a policy questionnaire. Also, the study didn't distinguish between transportation noise sources.
Similar to van Lente et al., a cross-sectional study by Honold et al. (2012), found that residents from blocks highly burdened by noise, air pollution and access to green spaces, were consuming significantly more nicotine than low-burden blocks.
Roswall et al., 2017b, within a very large study, investigated the association between smoking and residential noise exposure for road and rail sources, cross-sectionally and longitudinally. In the cross-sectional analysis road traffic noise exposure 5 years before baseline was positively associated with smoking intensity and being a smoker after controlling for demographic and socio-economic factors. However, the longitudinal analyses found no association between road traffic noise and change in smoking habits between baseline and follow up. Railway noise was not associated with smoking habits either in cross-sectional nor in longitudinal analyses.
Alcohol consumption was investigated and reported in two studies, with contradicting results. Roswall et al., 2017b found an association between long-term exposure to residential road traffic noise and alcohol consumption, but no association for railway sources nor any consumption changes between baseline and follow up. Honold et al. (2012) found that alcohol consumption did not differ significantly between high and low exposed blocks.
Overall, there seems to be some evidence of an association between transportation noise and smoking habits in cross-sectional studies, although changes in smoking habits over time have not been shown to be attributable to traffic noise. Inconsistent results were found between traffic noise and alcohol consumption.
The results of these studies remained valid after controlling for possible confounders such as socioeconomic factors, except for Honold et al. (2012) who found that the associations between low and high burden blocks and healthy behaviours including smoking and alcohol consumption were significant only for employed residents. Although there seems to be an association between smoking factors and traffic noise, van Lenthe and Mackenbach (2006) and Roswall et al. (2017b) did not investigate the interaction with people's response to noise. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if this self-reported response influences the relationship between smoking habits and noise.
3.2. Community
Three articles addressing community related issues met the inclusion criteria. The studies were classified in two main areas, as shown in Table 4: (1) the wish to move from current residence/neighbourhood, and (2) social interactions.
Table 4. Associations between transportation noise, responses to noise and community factors.
Community factor	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
Home moving	• Two studies found a positive association between self-reported response to noise and home moving.
• One study found that the association between home moving and self-reported response to noise is mediated through residential satisfaction.
• One study found that noise levels were not associated with home moving and one study finds that higher noise exposure areas have lower moving intentions despite reporting higher perceived nuisances.	Very small number of studies. Results are inconsistent and are based upon cross-sectional evidence. There are differences in the measurement of response and home moving indicators as well as in the noise indicator used. All control for socio-economic factors.	Brink (2011)
Hamersma et al. (2015)
Social interaction	• Residents along heavy traffic streets are not significantly more bothered by noise when walking in the neighbourhood or when children are playing outside.
• No association found between traffic volume and social interaction.
• People talking, walking pets and children playing with toys were more frequently observed in streets with low traffic volumes.	Only one cross-sectional study using questionnaire and annotated image mapping exercise. Noise exposure assessment is unreliable and uses traffic volume as a proxy. Although traffic volume could be indicative of noise exposure levels, no information is given in the article. Not statistically controlled for socioeconomic factors.	Sanders et al. (2015)a
a
Does not use noise exposure data.
3.2.1. Moving from residence/neighbourhood
Two articles addressed the effects of transportation noise on residential mobility. Hamersma et al. (2015) asked participants about their wish to move from the current residence and Brink (2011) asked about their future moving intentions. The noise source in question was road noise from highway traffic in Hamersma et al. (2015) and road and rail noise in Brink (2011). Both studies were cross-sectional and used questionnaires and objective noise levels to derive relationships between noise, self-reported noise appraisal, and residential moving. The subjective appraisal of noise was recorded differently in each study. Brink (2011) measured the awareness of noise as a problem and Hamersma et al. (2015) the perceived noise nuisance.
Despite the differences in wording of the questions and sources of noise investigated, both studies concluded that there is a positive association between the self-reported appraisal of noise and desire to move, although Hamersma et al. (2015) found that this association was mediated by residential satisfaction. Brink (2011) found that noise levels do not increase people's moving intention and Hamersma et al. (2015) found that those living in higher noise exposure areas have less intention to move despite reporting higher perceived nuisances. None of the studies specifically examined the past noise history of each respondent which could reveal changes and cumulative effects of past noise environments.
3.2.2. Social interaction
Only one article investigating social interaction and a proxy of noise met our inclusion criteria. This was a cross-sectional study carried out in Vietnam. Sanders et al. (2015) reports different aspects of social interaction such as frequency of activities taking place in the street, number of people known in the street, number of friends and acquaintances in relation to streets with different traffic volumes. Respondents were asked to rate how often they were bothered by traffic noise when conducting a set of activities, including when walking in the neighbourhood and when their children were playing outside. Although it was found that participants along light traffic streets experience lower stress, no relation was found between living in a heavy traffic street and reported bother when walking or when children are playing in the street. The authors concluded that participants along light traffic streets do not experience a significantly higher level of social interaction than those along heavy traffic volume streets, although some activities such as people talking, walking pets and children playing with toys were more frequently observed in light traffic streets. The study does not investigate or discuss the correlation between traffic volumes and noise levels although it could be used as a proxy of noise. Therefore, no conclusions can be drawn between noise levels and social interactions but only between traffic volumes and social interactions.
3.3. Activities
Fourteen articles considered the impacts of noise on different types of activities and are reported in Table 5. These examined the effects of noise on specific aspects of (1) learning, (2) traveling, (3) playing and (4) general living.
Table 5. Associations and modification effects between transportation noise, responses to noise and activities.
Activity	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
Learning
(children home exposure)	• Aircraft noise at home doesn't have a clear impact on children reading and cognitive performance because exposure at home is significantly correlated to exposure at school.
• Road traffic noise at home doesn't have a clear impact on cognitive performance as there is a moderate correlation between exposure at school and at home.
• One study reports disturbances to children conducting homework at home and impaired mental-wellbeing.
• Attention disorders due to road traffic noise reported in one study but this only uses distance from home to road as a proxy of noise.
• One study reports combined effects of air pollution and road traffic noise only for reaction times test.	Results are somehow consistent but mainly cross-sectional. There are differences in the measurement of response and the cognitive/ learning response indicators. Most control for demographic, socio-economic factors. Some but not all studies control for acoustical conditions such as glazing. The majority of studies did not investigate the effects of nighttime noise on learning. The association between self-reported noise response of children and learning outcomes has not been investigated.	Clark et al. (2005)
Haines et al. (2003)
Klatte et al. (2017)
Skrzypek et al. (2017)a
van Kempen et al. (2010)
van Kempen et al. (2012)
Traveling in the neighbourhood	• One study reports that higher perceived noise is linked to walking faster.
• One study reports that traffic noise is seen as a deterrent to walking along a high street.
• Higher railway noise annoyance linked to lower train riding frequency.	None of the studies has assessed noise levels. Results are inconsistent due to differences in outcome measurement. Small number of studies based on one cross-sectional, one observational and one intervention study. None of the studies controls for demographic or socio-economic factors.	Chan and Lam (2008)a
Franěk (2013)a
Mindell et al. (2017)a
Playing and
recreation	• One study reports that decreased exposure to road traffic noise is associated with initiation of leisure time sports, non-cessation of leisure time sports and participation in leisure time sports.
• One study reports that aircraft noise annoyance and other types of noise appraisal are linked to increased visiting frequency of a recreational area after an airport closed down.
• One study reports that usage of a recreational area after an increase/decrease of aircraft noise is related to using the area for certain activities.
• One study reports that aircraft noise levels are linked to acceptability of noise in a recreational setting.	Results are consistent and include intervention, longitudinal and cross-sectional data. Each study focuses on different aspects of playing and recreation. Some but not all studies control for demographic and socio-economic factors. It is unknown whether the impact of transportation noise on recreational activities is due to exposure, the self-reported response due to noise or other non-acoustic factors.	Aasvang and Engdahl (2004)
Krog et al. (2010a)a
Krog et al. (2010b)a
Roswall et al. (2017a)
General living	• Those highly annoyed are more likely than those less annoyed to report disturbance of daily activities.	Only one cross-sectional study available. It uses a distance proxy of noise instead of noise exposure levels.	Michaud et al. (2008)a
a
Does not use noise exposure data.
3.3.1. Learning
Six articles looked at the effects of transportation noise on children's learning in the residential environment. Two articles focussed on the effects of aircraft noise on children's reading, one article on the effects of road traffic noise on attention, two articles on the effects of road and aircraft noise on cognitive performance and finally one article on the effects of aircraft and road noise on reported disturbances while learning. No articles that satisfied the inclusion criteria looked at the effects of transportation noise on adult learning.
Clark et al. (2005) found that aircraft noise at home and at school was associated with poorer reading comprehension. On the other hand, van Kempen et al. (2010) found no significant association between aircraft noise exposure at home and cognitive performance; although an effect was found with aircraft noise exposures at school. Despite these findings, both authors conclude that due to the high correlations that are typically found between noise exposure at home and at school it is not possible to determine if noise at school, at home or a combination of both is responsible for the effects of noise on reading or cognitive performance. Although lower reading and cognitive performance is not clearly attributable to aircraft noise exposure at home, Haines et al. (2003) found that activities related to learning such as doing homework were reported as being disturbed by children exposed to high levels of aircraft noise. Klatte et al. (2017) found a linear relationship between parents' ratings of children's mental well-being and aircraft noise, which could indirectly influence learning performance.
For road traffic noise, Skrzypek et al. (2017) reported that attention disorders and sleep disturbance, which may impact on children's learning, were significantly associated with exposure to traffic noise. This study was based on parental responses to questions regarding children's attention disorders and sleep disturbance. However, the study does not use a noise indicator but a traffic density metric. Thus, it is not possible to tell whether the effects are due to noise or whether they are attributable to other environmental factors such as air pollution. Van Kempen et al. (2010) found that cognitive outcomes measured by Neurobehavioral Evaluation System (NES) were not related with road traffic exposure at home.
Combined cognitive effects of noise and air pollution were investigated by van Kempen et al. (2012). The relationship between air pollution and transportation noise on cognitive performance of schoolchildren at home was derived from the same dataset as in van Kempen et al. (2010). No effects of home noise exposure were found. An interaction was found between noise and air pollution and children's reaction times. Children living in areas with high levels of road traffic noise had a shorter reaction time as NO2 concentrations increased.
The interaction between exposure to air pollution and road traffic noise at home was significant for some specific cognitive tests (i.e. reaction times measured with Simple Reaction Time Test and the ‘arrow’ condition of the Switching Attention Test). Overall, however, no effects of air pollution and road traffic noise were observed. High NO2 concentrations at home had a larger effect on the reaction times in high road traffic noise exposure categories than in low traffic noise exposure categories. However, the additional adjustment for road traffic and aircraft noise had little effect on the associations between NO2 and the overall neurobehavioral functioning. In the same way, additional adjustment for NO2 was found to have little effect on the associations observed between road and aircraft noise exposure and neurobehavioral functioning.
The effect of annoyance or other self-reported health and well-being measures together with learning outcomes were only reported in a qualitative study by Haines et al. (2003) who found that the majority of children who reported that homework was affected by aircraft noise at home also expressed some form of annoyance reaction.
Overall, no consistent results were reported for the impact of exposure to transportation noise at home on children's learning. For primary school children a number of studies report that it is difficult to disentangle effects from noise exposure at home and noise exposure at school. All the subset of results reviewed here have used indicators that don't account for night-time noise which could have an effect on sleep and consequently affect learning at school.
3.3.2. Traveling in the neighbourhood
Three studies satisfied the inclusion criteria in this category. One was an intervention study using cross-sectional surveys, one was a qualitative interview and one was an observational study. Two papers focused on people's walking and one paper on train usage.
Franěk (2013) found that participants walked significantly faster in sections without greenery, with more traffic, higher perceived noise and more people. Furthermore, participants reported they wanted to leave the places that had more intense traffic and higher perceived noise as well as fewer natural elements. Road traffic noise in the neighbourhood was also reported as deterrent to walking, especially in people living within close distance to a busy road by Mindell et al. (2017). Neither of these studies measured objective noise exposure levels. Therefore, it is not possible to know if the reported and observed responses to noise are due to noise caused by road traffic.
The interactions between noise annoyance and railway riding frequency were investigated in an intervention study (Chan and Lam, 2008) of a new railway line. Annoyance from railway noise was found to be higher for people who didn't use the railway line frequently. The study also found that after an intervention based on a communication campaign about railway noise, annoyance from railway noise was still higher for non-riders. The authors suggest that people who frequently use the line are more tolerant to the noise impact than those who don't.
3.3.3. Playing and recreation
Four studies looked at the interaction of transportation noise on recreational activities. Two articles, which shared the same dataset, were interventions that aimed to investigate the effect of increased and decreased aircraft noise on a recreational area in terms of perceived recreational quality and frequency of use. The third article investigated acceptability of aircraft noise and annoyance due to aircraft noise in an outdoor recreational setting. The fourth study evaluated participation in leisure sports in relation to rail or road noise exposure levels in the residential environment.
Two studies (Krog et al., 2010a; Krog et al., 2010b) found that aircraft noise annoyance judgements, or other types of noise appraisal, influenced individual's choices to use local outdoor recreational areas as well as the reported perceived recreational quality of the areas. The authors showed that the frequency of use of a recreational area - after the closure of a major airport in Norway - increased among those who reported that noise was a reason for not using the area when the airport was operational. Likewise, after the airport closure, perceived recreational quality significantly increased for those reporting annoyance when the airport was operational. Following the relocation of the airport (where there was already a smaller airport), the usage of the recreational area in that location decreased for people who were using the area to conduct specific activities such as running, jogging, picking berries or mushrooms. The frequency of use before the airport expansion also influenced the non-usage after the change. Those who were using the area for bicycle riding, for the nature experience or generally frequented the area before the expansion, were more likely to report aircraft noise as the reason for not visiting the area anymore.
Another noise aircraft study by Aasvang and Engdahl (2004) found that acceptability of aircraft noise in a recreational setting was linked to noise exposure. 80 dB LAE (A-weighted sound exposure level) was found to be the exposure level at which 50% of participants gave a rating of noise “not acceptable”.
Roswall et al. (2017a), in a longitudinal study, linked the prevalence of participation in leisure time sports, as well as the prevalence of initiating or ceasing sports, with road and rail noise levels in the residential area. The results suggest a small association between noise levels caused by road and rail sources and the prevalence of non-participation in leisure time sports. Reduced road noise levels were seen to be associated with initiation and non-cessation of leisure time sports.
In all the studies there appears to be some evidence that either noise exposure or self-reported response to transport noise influences people taking part on recreational activities in parks, streets or leisure centres. However, it is not clear whether the impact on recreational activities is due to noise exposure, the self-reported response from transportation noise or non-acoustic confounding factors not accounted for in the studies' design. Furthermore, each study investigated a particular noise source; therefore, it is difficult to know at this stage if some sources of noise have a greater impact on recreational activities than others.
3.3.4. General living
Only one study matched this category. Michaud et al. (2008) investigated activity disturbances such as sleeping, voice raising, hearing people, hearing the TV or the radio and concentration on reading or writing due to road traffic noise This study only used a distance proxy to noise and found that people living within 30 m from a major road were more likely to report sleep disturbance, interference with hearing, interference with reading and having to raise their voices because of road traffic noise.
3.4. Local economy
Eight articles which addressed different relationships between noise levels, the human response to noise and the impact on local economy met the inclusion criteria. Six articles focused on the impact of noise or the response to noise on house price, one on the impact to the noise response of having an economic connection with the noise source and one on the impact of the area's affluency on the noise exposure-response relationship. The synthesis of the findings is summarised in Table 6 and is organised in three sections: (1) house price, (2) economic links to noise source and (3) affluency of the area.
Table 6. Associations and modification effects between, noise, response to noise and the local economy.
Local Economy	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
House price	• For aircraft noise three studies found a decrease in house price of about 0.7–1% in properties for sale and slightly higher prices of about 1–1.7% in properties for rent. However, one study conducted in a small city found no change in sales price due to aircraft noise. One study found that depreciation of house value is only experienced in houses where the altitude of the planes is lower than 1000 m.
• The increase of noise on the house price due to road noise was found to be very small. For properties on sale one study found a that a 1% increase in noise decreases prices 0.035%. A study on properties for rent found that a 1 dB reduction resulted in a reduction of 0.2% in price.
• One study on road noise found that housing prices in urban areas are better explained by the subjective evaluation of noise rather than noise levels.
• Railway noise was found not to have any effect on rented property prices.	Results are mainly consistent but largely based on cross-sectional evidence and have used the hedonic price method or variations of this. Most studies have taken into consideration socio-economic factors or neighbourhood characteristics. One intervention study shows similar patterns. The self-reported response to noise was only investigated in one study.	Mense and Kholodilin (2014)
Dekkers and van der Straaten (2009)
Le Boennec and Salladarré (2017)
Chasco and Gallo (2013)
Lipscomb (2003)
Püschel and Evangelinos (2012)
Economic links with the noise source	• Economical connection with the airport reduces annoyance due to aircraft noise. This connection is estimated to have an effect equivalent to a 2 dB change in exposure.	Only one study based on cross-sectional data. Other socio-economic factors were considered but are not specified in the study.	Brooker (2010)
Affluence of area	• The effect of road traffic noise in the residential neighbourhood on noise annoyance was stronger in affluent neighbourhoods.	Only one study but based on a cohort study. The study accounts for neighbourhood socio-economic factors.	Méline et al. (2013)
3.4.1. House price
Six articles which considered a change in value of properties located in areas affected by transportation noise were found.
Four studies found in this review investigated the effects of aircraft noise on property prices (Mense and Kholodilin, 2014; Dekkers and van der Straaten, 2009; Lipscomb, 2003; and Püschel and Evangelinos, 2012). Whilst all European studies, Mense and Kholodilin (2014), Dekkers and van der Straaten (2009) and Püschel and Evangelinos (2012) found a decrease in property price due to aircraft noise, the study from Lipscomb (2003) conducted in a small city in Atlanta found no change in sales price due to aircraft noise. The methodologies used in these studies to calculate the noise depreciation are based on revealed preferences (e.g. consumer choices on property sales/rentals) and most particularly on the hedonic price model.
The reduction in prices due to aircraft noise was different across studies. Dekkers and van der Straaten (2009), in a cross-sectional study, found noise depreciation of approximately 0.7% at levels starting at 45 dB. The values for rental apartments were found to be slightly higher than for house sales: Püschel and Evangelinos (2012) found a reduction in price of 1% on apartments for rent. One intervention study by Mense and Kholodilin (2014), which focussed on the role of expectations of aircraft noise before and after the publication of the planned flight paths of an airport, found a decrease of 0.8% in property prices per dB increase in flight altitudes lower than 1000 m. The scale of the airport in all three studies is similar - all refer to large international airports in Europe. However, this slight variation in price reduction due to aircraft noise could be the result of using different noise metrics or different urban characteristics. None of these studies investigated self-reported responses to noise.
A very small number of studies investigated the increase of noise on the house price due to road noise. The methodology used in these studies to calculate the noise depreciation, as for the aircraft noise studies are based on the hedonic price model. The reduction of property prices due to road noise was found to be very small. Le Boennec and Salladarré (2017), in a cross-sectional study, found that for properties on sale, a 1% increase in noise from combined road and rail sources decreased prices by 0.035%. Another cross-sectional study by Püschel and Evangelinos (2012) found that a 1 dB reduction on road traffic noise resulted in a reduction of 0.2% in the price of apartments for rent. On the other hand, Chasco and Gallo (2013) found that noise levels had a positive influence on housing prices and it was only negative when people's perceptions were considered by asking if external noise was a problem. However, this negative effect was very small - in the range of a 0.001% price change. Whilst the studies by Le Boennec and Salladarré (2017) and Püschel and Evangelinos (2012) were carried out in medium sized cities of France and Germany, the study by Chasco and Gallo (2013) was done in a large capital city (Madrid). This could explain the difference in results found.
Railway noise, on its own, was only investigated in one study by Püschel and Evangelinos (2012). The study found that rail noise levels had no effect on rented property prices.
3.4.2. Economic links with the noise source
Only one article was found in this domain. Brooker (2010), in a cross-sectional study, found that having an economic connection with the airport (e.g. having a job linked to the airport) reduces annoyance due to aircraft noise compared to people without these economic links. This connection was estimated to have an effect equivalent to a 2 dB change in noise exposure. It is not clear from the study which other socio-demographic factors were considered.
3.4.3. Affluence of area
A relationship between noise and the neighbourhood affluency was found in one study. Méline et al. (2013) in a cohort study found that relationships between road traffic noise and annoyance were stronger in affluent and highly educated neighbourhoods than in deprived and low educated neighbourhoods. Affluency of the neighbourhood was measured as the neighbourhood median income and noise levels were measured at neighbourhood level. No interaction with affluency of the area was found with noise levels at the place of residence and no interaction was found with noise and individual socio-economic variables.
3.5. Built environment
Thirty articles related to different characteristics of the built environment met the inclusion criteria and are reported in Table 7. These examined specific aspects of the built environment such as (1) quiet areas and facades, (2) green and blue spaces (3) type of housing (4) neighbourhood layout (5) odour (6) dust (7) background noise level and (8) view of the noise source.
Table 7. Associations and modification effects between, noise, response to noise and the built environment.
Built Environment	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
Quiet areas/Quiet façades	• Four studies reported that having access to a quiet side or quiet courtyard of the building is linked with less noise annoyance due to road traffic.
• Two studies found a link between increased activity disturbances outdoors and indoors and not having access to a quiet façade or courtyard.
• One study found no links between quietness of the area and outdoor or indoor annoyance.	Consistent results but based upon cross-sectional evidence. Some but not all studies control for demographic and socio-economic factors. Most studies used the standardised annoyance response.	Klæboe (2007)
Klæboe et al. (2005)
Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström (2010)
van Renterghem and Botteldooren (2012)
Öhrström et al. (2006)
de Kluizenaar et al. (2011)
Green/Blue
areas	• Eight studies found positive effect of green spaces (availability or view from home) on reported noise annoyance due to road traffic. One study found no effect.
• One study found positive effect of availability of green spaces on reported noise annoyance due to aircraft noise.
• One study found a positive effect of blue spaces on road noise annoyance, but it reports that greenery has a stronger effect on annoyance than blue spaces.	Results mainly consistent and based on cross-sectional, laboratory and observational data. Some studies don't assess noise levels and only focus on the self-reported response to noise. There are differences in the measurement of green/blue spaces but most studies use subjective responses to assess availability of green/blue areas. There is very limited evidence for rail and aircraft noise sources as most of the research focussed on road traffic noise. Most studies control or have considered demographic and socio-economic factors. Most studies used the standardised annoyance response.	Franěk (2013)a
Li et al. (2012)
Zijlema et al. (2017)a
Bodin et al. (2015)
Yang et al. (2011)
Leung et al. (2017a)
Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström (2007)
van Renterghem and Botteldooren (2016)a
Job and Hatfield (2001)a
Li et al. (2010)
Type of housing	• Type of housing (i.e. detached, apartment etc.) shows different effects on noise annoyance/disturbance depending on the source and noise levels.
• Two studies found that people living in detached or semi-detached houses are more annoyed by aircraft noise than people living in other types of housing at the same noise levels, although this effect is only true at low noise levels.
• Mixed results were found for road traffic noise. Two studies found people living in apartments or terraced houses are more disturbed by road traffic noise than people living in detached or semi-detached houses. Two studies found opposite effect for annoyance or no effect at all. Cross-sectional data only.	Results are consistent for aircraft noise and not consistent for road traffic noise. Results are based on cross-sectional data. Not all the studies included noise levels as a determinant of annoyance or disturbance. All aircraft studies take into account socio-economic factors whilst two of the road studies which found an association between disturbance and living in apartments/terraced houses have not accounted for any socio-economic factor.	Whitfield (2003)
Yano et al. (2002)
Bluhm et al. (2004)a
Babisch et al. (2012)
Neighbourhood layout	• One study found that high-rise high-density residential areas does not results in increased or decreased road noise annoyance.
• One study reported that people living in areas with public transport are more likely to be annoyed by noise caused by road traffic.
• One study reported that people living in an area with L shaped streets (broad streets) are more likely to be annoyed by traffic noise at the same noise level than people living in U shaped streets (narrow streets).
• One study found no significant association between satisfaction with traffic and noise in the neighbourhood and characteristics such as residential density, land use mix – diversity, land use mix – access, street connectivity, infrastructure for walking and cycling, aesthetics and greenery, traffic load, traffic safety, safety from crime, hilliness, physical barriers to walking, presence of cul-de-sacs, and parking difficulty.	Results are inconsistent. Some show that some neighbourhood layouts have an effect on noise annoyance and some didn't find any effect. Small number of studies and based on cross-sectional data. Most studies don't control for socio-economic factors.	Brown et al. (2015)
Leslie and Cerin (2008)a
Paunović et al. (2014)
Camusso and Pronello (2016)

Odour	• One study finds that odour annoyance is significantly correlated with noise levels and reported noise interference due to road traffic.
• One study found no effect of rose odour on perceived loudness or reported annoyance due to road traffic noise.	
Results are not consistent. Small number of studies based on cross-sectional and laboratory data. None of the studies controls for socio economic factors.	
Oiamo et al. (2015)
Jiang et al. (2016)
Dust	• Highly annoyed by dust/soot is more likely to report high noise annoyance by highway or road noise at the same noise level.
• Noise annoyance found to be a better predictor of Dust/soot annoyance than NO2.	Only one study based on cross-sectional data. Incorporates controls for some socio-economic factors.	Lercher et al. (2017)
Background noise levels	• The annoyance response to a given level of aircraft noise is less in neighbourhoods with high background noise than those with low background noise.	Only one study based on cross-sectional data. This study didn't examine possible socio-economic factors as confounders in the relationship.	Lim et al. (2008)
View to the noise source	• One study finds that viewing rail road/rail sources increases noise annoyance reporting compared to hearing the noise source only. No increase or decrease found when aircraft sources can be seen.
• One study finds that greenery can reduce annoyance caused by road or rail noise
• One study finds that railway noise annoyance decreases when natural water features can be visualised.	Results are consistent regarding the railway annoyance decrease found when natural features can be visualised. Other results are only based on one study. All the results are based on laboratory data.	Preis et al. (2016)
Lee et al. (2014)
a
Does not use noise exposure data.
3.5.1. Quiet areas and quiet façades
Six articles addressed the effects of having access to a quiet side of the building, a quiet courtyard or a quiet area on reported annoyance or activity disturbance. All of the articles focused on road traffic and defined access to a quiet side as having one façade that is of less than 10 dBA from the most exposed façade.
Living in a dwelling with access to a quiet side or courtyard seemed to have a positive impact on reported annoyance and activity disturbance. Four studies (Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström, 2010; van Renterghem and Botteldooren, 2012; Öhrström et al., 2006; de Kluizenaar et al., 2011) assessed the effect of having a quiet side or a quiet courtyard available on road noise annoyance. They found that annoyance among those with access to a quiet side or a quiet courtyard was lower than for those without. de Kluizenaar et al. (2011) also reported that the reduction in annoyance due to having access to a quiet side depends on the difference between the noise levels on the most and least exposed façade as well as on the absolute noise level of the most exposed façade. Klæboe et al. (2005) found that the difference between road traffic noise exposure at the most exposed façade and the noise level in the immediate neighbourhood affects noise annoyance reporting inside and outside the dwelling. Another study by Klæboe (2007) which investigated the effect of having access to quiet neighbourhood areas on annoyance outside and inside the respondent's dwelling found no beneficial effect.
In addition to annoyance, disturbance of some activities due to road traffic noise was also shown to be reduced where a quiet courtyard or a quiet side is available. Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström (2010) found that high-quality quiet courtyards are associated with less noise-disturbed outdoor activities such as relaxation, communication and outdoor stay. Results also showed that residents with access to high-quality quiet courtyards hear more frequently natural or human sounds compared to residents without such access. Öhrström et al. (2006) found that relaxation indoors and outdoors benefited from having a shielded, quieter side on one's dwelling. In addition to this, Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström (2010) report that residents with access to high-quality quiet courtyards hear more frequently natural or human sounds compared to residents without such access.
Overall, the evidence shows consistent results regarding the impact of road traffic noise on annoyance in residents with and without access to a quiet façade or quiet courtyard. Road traffic noise annoyance and activity disturbance are reduced when there is availability of a quiet side or courtyard.
3.5.2. Green and blue spaces
Ten articles addressed the effect of green or blue spaces on the self-reported response to transportation noise. These mainly dealt with road traffic noise although one article investigated aircraft noise and one article investigated combined rail and road noise. There were disparities between studies such as the measure of green/blue space used, the measure used to evaluate the response to noise and the type of study. The green/blue spaces measures were self-reported for eight out of the ten studies and focused on the amount of greenery, view of green/blue features from residence or availability of green areas near the residence. Two studies used objective measures of green spaces. Zijlema et al. (2017) used the distance from the residence to nearest green area and Yang et al. (2011) used controlled views of greenery in a laboratory study. The noise response assessment was fairly consistent for most of the studies. Seven studies used the standardised annoyance assessment described in ISO 15666. Only one study used a non-standardised noise annoyance scale (Job and Hatfield, 2001) and two studies used other measures which were related to how noisy the environment felt (Franěk, 2013; Yang et al., 2011).
Franěk (2013) found that streets with less greenery were perceived as more noisy. Li et al. (2012) found that view to greenery and sea reduced the likelihood of reporting road noise annoyance. Bodin et al. (2015) found that one window facing to a green space was associated with reduced noise annoyance. Yang et al. (2011) found that plants have a positive effect on noise perception at same road noise levels. Leung et al. (2017a) found that view to green or blue features was linked to reduced noise annoyance although greenery had a strongest capability to reduce noise annoyance than blue spaces. Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström (2007) found that better availability of green areas decreased long-term noise annoyance as well as noise disturbance of outdoor stay. van Renterghem and Botteldooren (2016) found that self-reported view to outdoor vegetation was a significant predictor of road noise annoyance although they found that living in a green neighbourhood was not associated with noise annoyance. Job and Hatfield (2001) found a weak association between annoyance due to aircraft noise and availability of parks in the neighbourhood. Li et al. (2010) reported that the perception of nearby greenery can reduce noise annoyance at home. Conversely, Zijlema et al. (2017) found no relation between distance from the residence to nearest green area and traffic noise annoyance due to road traffic.
Despite the methodological differences between these studies, view of or access to green spaces appear to reduce the negative response to road traffic noise. However, it is not clear if objective noise levels also play a role. There is very limited evidence for air and rail transportation noise sources as most of the research focussed on road traffic noise. The effect of blue spaces on the response to road traffic noise is as yet unclear due to the small number of studies available.
3.5.3. Type of housing
Four studies examined the effects that living in a detached, semi-detached, terraced or apartment blocks have on the self-reported response to transportation noise. All of these studies used a cross-sectional design and focused on either road or aircraft noise. The response measures used were annoyance or sleep/rest disturbance due to noise.
Bluhm et al. (2004) found that people living in apartments were more sleep disturbed by road traffic noise than people living in detached or semi-detached houses, although no effect of housing type was observed for annoyance reporting. Yano et al. (2002) found that other types of disturbance such as interference with TV and radio listening caused by road traffic noise was higher for people living in apartments. Conversely, the results of Babisch et al. (2012) showed that residents in terraced housing or apartments were less annoyed by road traffic noise than residents in semi-detached or detached housing at levels below 60 dB(A) LAeq,24h.
Regarding aircraft noise, Whitfield (2003) found a significantly higher percentage reporting being disturbed in detached houses than in other types of housing at low levels of noise below 54 dB(A) LAeq(16h). In this study, the level of deprivation of the area didn't explain the difference found in noise disturbance at low levels below 54 dB(A). Babisch et al. (2012) found similar results which showed that people living in semi- or detached properties were more likely to be annoyed by aircraft noise at levels at low and moderate noise levels up to 60 dB (A) Lden.
Overall, the studies reviewed show that type of housing can modify the annoyance response to aircraft noise when levels are low. The direction of the modifying effect was inconsistent for road traffic noise. This may be due to the variety of outcomes measured such as annoyance and different types of disturbances. Furthermore, it is not clear if type of housing acts as an indicator of the subject's expectations, socio-economic status, or other factors as not all of the studies have accounted for these potential confounders.
3.5.4. Neighbourhood layout
Four studies met the inclusion criteria in this category. All four studies had a cross-sectional design, and investigated the effect of different characteristics of the residential area on the self-reported response due to road traffic noise. The neighbourhood characteristics studied were height of buildings, residential density, access to public transport, shape, density and connectivity of streets, land use mix, walking and cycling infrastructure, aesthetics and greenery, traffic load, traffic safety, safety from crime, topography, physical barriers to walking, presence of cul-de-sacs, and parking difficulty.
The effects of high-rise and high-density residential areas on traffic noise annoyance and sleep disturbance reporting were investigated in a cross-sectional study in Hong Kong by Brown et al. (2015). The exposure-response relationships for both annoyance and sleep disturbance due to road traffic noise in high-rise and high-density areas were compared to the standard curves used in Europe (Miedema and Oudshoorn, 2001). The study found that high annoyance and sleep disturbance in high-rise high-density areas fell within the tolerance limits of this curves. Moreover, floor level was found not to be a predictor of annoyance.
Camusso and Pronello (2016) used exposure-response curves to compare annoyance due to road traffic noise between two different street types. The authors found that there is a higher probability of annoyance due to road traffic noise in people living in L sections (e.g. broad streets) compared to those living in U sections (e.g. narrow streets) at the same noise level. This difference was quantified to be equivalent to a 4 dB(A) noise increase.
Paunović et al. (2014) investigated the relationship between the presence of public transport in a neighbourhood and road traffic noise annoyance. On one hand, the number of public transport vehicles was found to be a predictor of the likelihood of annoyance during daytime. On the other hand, during night-time, the type of public transport, namely buses and trams, were found to be the main factor influencing annoyance. Although the study investigated a great variety of possible confounders, it did not investigate annoyance due to non-transportation noise (e.g. from people waiting at bus/tram stops) which can be an indirect effect of public transport.
Leslie and Cerin (2008) investigated the association between neighbourhood characteristics and satisfaction with traffic and noise in the area. They used a combined scale that included ratings of satisfaction with the speed of traffic in the neighbourhood and satisfaction with the noise in the neighbourhood. Further to this, noise exposure was not measured. No significant association was found between satisfaction with traffic and noise in the neighbourhood and characteristics such as residential density, land use mix – diversity, land use mix – access, street connectivity, infrastructure for walking and cycling, aesthetics and greenery, traffic load, traffic safety, safety from crime, hilliness, physical barriers to walking, presence of cul-de-sacs, and parking difficulty.
The studies reviewed suggest that street layout and presence of public transport may influence people's annoyance for the same noise level. No associations were found between other neighbourhood characteristics and the self-reported response to noise.
3.5.5. Odour
Two articles investigated odour in combination with noise and the self-reported response to noise. Both articles focused on road traffic noise.
Oiamo et al. (2015) investigated the interactions between odour annoyance, noise annoyance or noise interference and road noise levels in a cross-sectional field study. Jiang et al. (2016) used a specific rose odour and different audio-visual scenarios of road traffic in the laboratory to investigate the impact on odour annoyance as well as on noise loudness and annoyance.
The results found were mixed. Whilst the field study from Oiamo et al. (2015) found that odour annoyance is positively correlated to road noise levels as well as to reported noise interference, Jiang et al. (2016) found only an interaction between odour annoyance and traffic noise level on noise annoyance.
3.5.6. Dust
There was only one article investigating the effects between dust, noise, and the self-reported response to noise that met our inclusion criteria. This was a cross-sectional study that investigated the effect of dust/soot on exposure-response relationships between road and rail traffic noise and annoyance.
Lercher et al. (2017) found that people highly annoyed by dust/soot are more likely to report high noise annoyance by highway or road noise at the same noise level. No effect of dust/soot annoyance was found on annoyance due to railway noise exposure-response relationships. The authors claim that in these contextual characteristics such as dusty environments, the impact of traffic noise on annoyance is often underestimated for the lower exposure ranges. Dust/soot annoyance was much better correlated with overall noise annoyance from road and rail sources than with NO2 exposure or noise exposure.
3.5.7. Background noise level
Only one study in this area was identified. This focused on the effect of background noise levels around two different airports in terms of annoyance to residents exposed to aircraft noise. The study investigated two different types of background noise levels, high (i.e. urban area) and low (i.e. rural area) with a mean of 55.5 dB(A) and 42 dB(A) respectively.
The study by Lim et al. (2008) found a reduced annoyance reaction at high background noise levels in people exposed to aircraft noise compared to those exposed to the same level but living in a neighbourhood with lower background noise. The authors conclude that the average difference in annoyance responses between the low noise background areas and high noise background areas is 35% at the same noise levels. However, this study didn't examine possible confounding factors such as urbanisation of the area, closeness to green areas or other socio-economic factors.
3.5.8. View of the noise source
Two studies investigated the influence of the view to the noise source in laboratory settings. Preis et al. (2016) found that the visibility of road and rail sources increased noise annoyance whilst the visibility of aircraft did not show any effect. Lee et al. (2014) found that hearing high-speed train noise whilst seeing a scene with natural features reduced noise annoyance compared to hearing only high-speed train noise.
The two studies identified show that, at the same noise exposure level, the visibility of road and rail sources increases the annoyance response compared to situations where the sources are not visible. The visual material shown in the experiments could be similar to that seen in some residential environments. Both studies showed that seeing natural features and greenery can reduce annoyance caused by road or rail noise. Both studies were based on laboratory data which may have limited ecological validity and may not be generalisable to real conditions of long-term exposure.
3.6. Natural environment
Ten articles looked at interactions between noise, self-reported response to noise and factors of the natural environment and are summarised in Table 8. The articles focused on road and aircraft sources and were classified into two categories:(1) natural sounds, and (2) natural parks/areas.
Table 8. Associations and modification effects between noise, self-reported response to noise and the natural environment.
Natural environment	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
Natural sounds	• Three studies reported that the use of water sounds to mask road traffic noise decreased the negative responses due to road noise. The suggested level of water to achieve this effect is same of road traffic but also can be achieved if levels are few dBs below road traffic.
• One study found that birdsong masking increases perceived naturalness, pleasantness and reduces road traffic noise annoyance.
• One study showed that natural sounds are linked with reduced aircraft noise annoyance as well as increased solitude and tranquillity mean ratings in national parks.	Consistent results based on laboratory studies and one small sample field study. Measurement of response to noise was not consistent across studies.	Mace et al. (2013)
Hao et al. (2016)
Brambilla and Maffei (2006)
Watts et al. (2009)
Leung et al. (2017b)
Jeon et al. (2010)
Natural
parks/areas	• Two studies reported that aircraft noise annoyance and interference with peace and quiet in national parks increases with noise level.
• One study reports that annoyance and dislike to aircraft noise in countryside areas is higher in quiet sites compared to seashore or picnic area sites.
• One study shows that visitors' negative responses are the strongest at the quiet sites in comparison to seashore areas or picnic areas.
• Two studies found that the response to aircraft noise depends on the type of activity carried out in the natural area.
• One study finds that annoyance due to aircraft noise in national parks depends on season and number of hours spent in but the effect of noise levels in that context is not assessed.	Studies evaluated many different aspects regarding the effect of aircraft noise in national parks. There is a very small number of studies for each aspect. Studies are based cross-sectional data only. Studies didn't control for socio-economic factors.	Anderson et al. (2011)
Chau et al. (2010)
Iglesias-Merchan et al. (2015)a
Rapoza et al. (2015)
a
Does not use noise exposure data.
3.6.1. Natural sounds
Six studies addressed the effect of natural sounds on the response to transportation noise. These were laboratory studies which used listening tests to assess different responses to noise such as annoyance, tranquillity, pleasantness, sound preference and acceptance to noise in environments containing natural sounds and transportation noise. Three studies investigated the effects of water sounds, two studies investigated the effect of birdsong and one study investigated natural sounds without specifying the source.
Watts et al. (2009), Leung et al. (2017b) and Jeon et al. (2010) found a positive effect of water features on the response due to road traffic noise although the measurement of response to noise was not consistent across studies. Whilst Watts et al. (2009) measured tranquillity ratings, Leung et al. (2017b) measured annoyance and Jeon et al. (2010) measured sound preference. These three studies suggest that the type and level of water sound has an effect on the noise response. In particular, streams, fountains or water falling into cavities show the most positive effects. A decrease in negative response due to road traffic noise was observed at water sound levels between 0 and 7 dB below road traffic noise, depending on the study.
Similarly, bird sounds were also found to have a positive effect on the response to noise. Hao et al. (2016) found that birdsong could improve perceived naturalness, annoyance and pleasantness when added with road traffic noise. Furthermore, bird twittering is the sound most expected to be found in parks according to Brambilla and Maffei (2006).
Aircraft noise studies also found that natural sounds reduced noise annoyance ratings in environments where both aircraft and natural sounds are present (Mace et al., 2013).
The studies by Watts et al. (2009) and Hao et al. (2016) found that apart from the sound itself, the visualisation of the natural sound source also improves the noise response.
3.6.2. Natural areas
Here, we consider natural areas to be national parks or large natural areas in the countryside. Four cross-sectional studies investigated the annoyance response due to aircraft noise in natural areas or national parks.
Anderson et al. (2011) and Rapoza et al. (2015) found that aircraft noise annoyance in national parks increases with increasing aircraft noise level. Both studies found that increasing aircraft noise levels lead to an increase in reported interference with natural quiet. Furthermore, Anderson et al. (2011) suggests that the annoyance response depends on the type of aircraft and altitude, where tour aircraft (i.e. low-flying tour aircraft, either helicopters or fixed-wing propeller driven aircraft) were found to be more annoying than high-altitude jets.
The type of natural area has also been shown to have an effect on the negative response to aircraft noise. Chau et al. (2010) found that annoyance and dislike to aircraft noise in countryside areas is higher in quiet sites (classified by the authors as nature trails, hills and valleys surrounding a reservoir and picnic areas on a foot slope) compared to seashore or roadside picnic area sites.
Two studies found that the response to aircraft noise was mediated by the type of activity carried out in the natural area. Anderson et al. (2011) found that more annoyance and interference was reported by people hiking compared to those that walked a short distance from their cars/buses to an overlook, mainly to view scenery. Similarly, Chau et al. (2010) found that annoyance and dislike is higher in people that use the countryside area for hiking or scenery appreciation compared to those using the area for having a picnic or a barbecue.
On the other hand, a study that investigated annoyance and perception of noise in a national park concluded that only a small percentage of visitors reported high annoyance due to aircraft noise in the park. No noise levels were reported (Iglesias-Merchan et al., 2015). Other findings from this study suggest that annoyance due to aircraft noise in the national park is higher in the summer and depends on the number of hours spent in the park.
3.7. Global ecosystem
Two studies addressing the effects of the ecosystem on the response to transportation noise were identified (Table 9). These focussed on the effects of meteorological conditions on community noise annoyance.
Table 9. Modification effects between noise, response to noise and the global ecosystem.
Global Ecosystem	Summary of results	Assessment of the evidence	References
Meteorological conditions	• One study found that a higher long-term noise annoyance from all transportation sources in the summer compared to winter was found.
• One study found a higher long-term noise annoyance ratings in the autumn than in the spring.
• Increasing temperature is associated with an increase in noise annoyance from all transportation sources. One study found that a 15 °C increase in temperature showed the same effect on noise annoyance as does a 1 dB increase in noise exposure. One study looking only at road traffic noise observed an increase of 0.16 points in the annoyance scale for 1 °C increase in temperature.
• Sunshine hours, precipitation and wind speed not associated with noise annoyance.	Based on two studies. One cross-sectional study which uses data from several individual studies and one longitudinal study carried out over a short period of time. Studies have large sample sizes. Response to noise was measured differently in individual studies. The studies don't take into consideration all potential confounders.	Miedema et al. (2005)
Brink et al. (2016)
3.7.1. Meteorological conditions
Miedema et al. (2005) analysed a large number of responses to road, aircraft and railway noise from 42 cross-sectional studies conducted at different times of the year. A slightly higher long-term noise annoyance in the summer compared to winter was found. However, although the analysis shows some influence of temperature increase in noise annoyance, the authors conclude that the findings are not sufficiently precise to determine whether the apparent relationships with meteorological conditions are only a result of seasonal variations or are also the result of differences in the climate at different locations. Moreover, the authors point out some risk of bias due to the influence of the meteorological conditions on the day of the interview.
Brink et al. (2016) investigated the influence of different meteorological characteristics on annoyance due to road traffic noise. The season of the survey was found to have an effect on the annoyance rating, with higher annoyance scores in autumn than in spring. The study also assessed other meteorological variables such as number of sunshine hours, precipitation, and temperature. A small but significant effect was found for the day air temperature average over the 30 days preceeding the survey.
4. Discussion
4.1. Overview
Over the last two decades, the evidence base on the health effects attributable to environmental noise exposure has strengthened considerably (WHO, 2018). A general stress-response model is used as the rationale behind the health response to noise exposure, (Babisch, 2002; Babisch, 2014; Münzel et al., 2014; WHO, 2018). A less explored area is how the wider environment we live in influences the cognitive and emotional response to the sound stimulus, and how the cognitive and emotional response influences personal behaviours and social interactions. This is important when seen with the broader context of the main influences of health. The concept of the wider determinants of health, first proposed by Dahlgren and Whitehead (1991) and further refined by Barton and Grant (2006), depicts these health determinants as a series of layers. These range from the natural and built environment, the material and social conditions in which people live and work, mutual support from family, friends, neighbours and the local community down to actions taken by individuals such as the food they choose to eat and their smoking and drinking habits. Any interactions between sound/noise and these wider determinants complicate the noise-health pathway, but an improved, holistic understanding can offer opportunities for refining and maximising the health benefits of interventions.
4.2. Main findings
In this review, we evaluated 76 papers investigating associations and modification effects between transportation noise, self-reported response to noise and the wider determinants of health classified according to the categories proposed by Barton and Grant (2006), i.e. lifestyle; community; local economy; activities; built environment; natural environment; and global ecosystem.
There was large heterogeneity across studies in terms of study design and findings. Nevertheless, this review found evidence of associations and modification effects between noise exposure, the subjective evaluation of noise and the wider determinants of health. The evidence suggests that transportation noise can have adverse effects on people's lifestyle, recreational activities, and the local economy. Conversely, some features of the built and natural environment such as greenness, having access to a quiet area, and masking the noise source either visually or acoustically with natural features can decrease people's negative responses to noise and therefore improve health and well-being.
Unhealthy lifestyles can contribute to metabolic and cardiovascular diseases as well as to impaired mental health (Velten et al., 2014; Farhud, 2015). Creating the right environment in a neighbourhood which encourages healthy habits can be a major influence on people's health and well-being (Edwards and Tsouros, 2008). Furthermore, playing and participating in recreational activities may influence health through strengthening people's relationships as well as through contributing to healthy behaviours (Karimian et al., 2015; WHO, 2010). This review shows that transportation noise could affect recreational activities through worsening the quality of leisure time, preventing people from practicing such activities and even stopping people walking in high streets.
In the studies of noise and lifestyle factors, there is evidence that living in an area exposed by transportation noise may decrease levels of physical activity. The studies, found that traffic noise is associated with a reduced engagement in physical activities (Foraster et al., 2016; Roswall et al., 2017a; Honold et al., 2012). The self-reported response to noise seems to play a role on the levels of physical activity. This suggests, as noted by Foraster et al. (2016), that annoyance caused by transportation noise may indirectly contribute towards cardiovascular disease, as well as to diabetes and obesity, by reducing physical activity. In addition to this findings, road traffic noise also seems to be associated with other non-healthy behaviours such as smoking (Roswall et al., 2017b; van Lenthe and Mackenbach, 2006; Honold et al., 2012); however, these later come from cross-sectional data and did not evaluate the relationship between smoking and the self-reported response to noise.
In the case of noise impacting people's activities, transportation noise seems to affect recreational activities through decreased participation as well as decreased usage of recreational areas (Roswall et al., 2017a; Aasvang and Engdahl, 2004; Krog et al., 2010a; Krog et al., 2010b). Higher road traffic noise was associated with a higher probability of ceasing or non-participation in leisure-time sports, and a lower probability of initiating sports (Roswall et al., 2017a). Road traffic noise was seen to act as a deterrent to walking in the streets either by stopping people from walking along busy streets or by making people walk faster to get to a quiet street (Franěk, 2013; Mindell et al., 2017). Aircraft noise was found to have an effect on the use of recreational areas, with decreases of aircraft noise resulting in increased usage of the recreational areas (Aasvang and Engdahl, 2004; Krog et al., 2010a; Krog et al., 2010b). In addition to this, Sanders et al. (2015) found that some activities such as people talking, walking pets and children playing with toys are more frequently observed in light traffic streets.
Studies investigating the effects of noise on local economy draw their main evidence from evaluating the effects of aircraft noise on property prices. The studies found evidence that aircraft noise has a negative impact on the price of properties (Mense and Kholodilin, 2014; Dekkers and van der Straaten, 2009; Lipscomb, 2003; Püschel and Evangelinos, 2012). Similarly, road noise also seems to have an effect on property prices; however this price devaluation is much lower than for aircraft noise (Chasco and Gallo, 2013; Püschel and Evangelinos, 2012). These results agree with previous reviews in this area (Nelson, 2004; Schipper et al., 1998; Bateman et al., 2001). However, although there is evidence for the association between noise levels and property prices, the link between noise annoyance and property devaluation is less well understood. This review found one study indicating that the self-reported response to noise could be a better predictor of housing prices than noise levels (Chasco and Gallo, 2013).
It appears that some characteristics of the neighbourhood can improve mental health and well-being by reducing noise annoyance or other negative responses to noise. Disposing of green spaces (i.e. having access or a view to green) nearby or disposing of a quiet side or quiet courtyard clearly decreases annoyance due to road traffic noise (Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström, 2010; van Renterghem and Botteldooren, 2012; Öhrström et al., 2006; de Kluizenaar et al., 2011; Franěk, 2013; Li et al., 2012; Bodin et al., 2015; Leung et al., 2017a; Gidlöf-Gunnarsson and Öhrström, 2007; Li et al., 2010). Likewise, natural sounds in the environment such as those from water features or birdsong can reduce negative responses to noise (Watts et al., 2009; Leung et al., 2017b; Jeon et al., 2010; Hao et al., 2016; Mace et al., 2013). However, the latter studies were conducted in the laboratory and therefore may not necessarily apply in residential environments.
4.3. Recommendations for further research
Based on this review, several suggestions as to future research on the effect of noise on the wider determinants of health are recommended. Further research is needed to improve our understanding on some of the relationships presented. We were not able to draw conclusions in many of the categories investigated due to the very small number of studies within these categories and the methodological inconsistencies between them.
Education is an important determinant of health as it increases the chances of having a better standard of living and improves opportunities to obtain the prerequisites of health (Bambra et al., 2010). Although this review found that road or aircraft noise exposure at home didn't have a clear impact on children's cognitive performance, further investigations are needed to disentangle the effects on children's learning due to noise exposure at home from those at school. Sleep is one of the routes in which noise could affect children's learning (Clark and Paunovic, 2018), and studies investigating the effects of night-time noise on children's learning are needed. The effects of noise at home on learning in adult populations remains unknown and also needs further research.
Social interactions are an important way how people connect within communities and consequently enhance their social capital and networks. Although the evidence was inconsistent, some studies found that transportation noise can discourage community-level action or decrease relationships and networks as a result of inducing more residential mobility. Current limitations include the lack of evidence from longitudinal studies.
The results of this review also highlight the importance of considering the self-reported response to noise, in addition to the noise exposure. Some studies established an association between the self-reported response to noise and the wider determinants of health but did not find similar associations with objectively calculated noise levels. For instance, whilst there was an association between noise annoyance and decreased physical activity, no evidence linking the objective noise levels and reduced levels of physical activity was found (Foraster et al., 2016). Likewise, moving home was found to be linked with the self-reported response to noise but a less clear picture was seen for noise levels (Brink, 2011; Hamersma et al., 2015). Honold et al. (2012) found an association between a combined healthy behaviour indicator (including smoking and alcohol intake) and perception to traffic noise. For other determinants of health, such as recreation, meditation intake, or property values, it is not clear yet if annoyance plays a more important role than the noise exposure itself. Although it seems plausible to assume that prices of properties decrease due to perceived noise annoyance or disturbance, only one study which measured annoyance was found. Therefore, further research is needed to confirm the importance of annoyance within the indirect noise-stress pathway in the relationships studied in this review.
A number of characteristics of the built environment can result in a reduction of the negative responses to noise. Although the review has found a range of studies showing the psychological positive effects of quiet areas, green spaces and natural sounds, there is a need for intervention studies following a robust protocol (Brown and Van Kamp, 2017) to confirm these findings.
Based on the results of the review, policy measures towards reducing noise impacts on health and well-being should focus on the built environment, where there is a potential for reducing noise annoyance and other negative self-reported responses through features such as availability of green spaces, quiet areas and natural sounds. In addition, when assessing noise impacts, policy makers, should be aware that transportation noise can have wider effects, including impacts on people's lifestyle, impacts on people's recreational activities, as well as impacts on the local economy.
4.4. Strengths and limitations
To the authors' best knowledge, this is the first attempt at synthesising the current evidence on the associations and modification effects between transportation noise and the wider determinants of health. By bringing together evidence from many different published articles, we provide an insight into the complex pathways through which sound and noise may be indirectly influencing people's health and wellbeing. There are however some limitations of the review which should be acknowledged.
The main challenge of this review was the broad area under investigation, which could lead to a lack of sensitivity and lack of specificity. This review aimed to map and synthetize the literature available on this topic, and therefore used wide search terms. To ensure that the searches were as extensive as possible, our search strategy included a broad range of databases which included health, engineering, acoustic, social, psychology, environmental and transport journals. The search strategy was developed iteratively, and was revised whenever necessary to ensure maximum relevance. However, there were limitations. For instance, wildcards could not be used due to the large number of false hits returned by the search. Moreover, although a large number of studies were identified (more than 2000), some studies may have been missed, particularly as we were only able to consider papers from peer-reviewed journals written in English.
Individual studies were classified and grouped according to the wider determinant of health categories. The number of studies within most categories is small, and there is arguably overlap between some categories. Although many of the studies were of good methodological quality, there was limited scope for comparison between studies within each category due to differences in noise exposure and subjective response indicators, as well as the use of different health outcomes. For instance, the outcomes from the studies investigating the effects of noise on physical activity ranged from time/vigorousness of the physical activity to participation in leisure-time sports. The self-reported response to noise also varied across studies. For instance, annoyance was characterised with terminology such as ‘annoyance’, ‘dissatisfaction’, ‘nuisance’, or ‘bother’, with different scales for each.
The risk of bias in most studies was high mainly because the self-reported response to noise and the outcomes related to the wider determinants of health were self-reported, some of them using non-validated scales and measures.
There was also variability in terms of assessing noise exposure. Most studies reporting noise exposure used noise modelling techniques or measurements. However, there are a number of studies which did not use any noise exposure assessment. Those used proxies such as distance, traffic volume or subjective responses to noise without accounting for the correlations between noise and those proxies. Therefore, especially in these studies the potential for exposure misclassification may be more substantial than for studies where noise was modelled or measured.
Associations between noise and the wider determinants of health are likely to be mediated and moderated by a broad range of personal, situational and contextual factors. There were large variations in the extent of control of confounding factors across studies, and it is not possible at this stage to discuss causal pathways. The sources of noise (in this case road, rail and air) are likely to interact with the wider determinants of health through many other mechanisms (for example improved connectivity), which further complicates observed associations.
Finally, in order to maximise the number of relevant articles, we did not specify a geographical boundary in the literature search. Contextual differences across studies can lead to different conclusions due to a variety of factors, including national welfare system, planning systems, cultural differences, social beliefs, etc. Therefore, the findings may not be easily transferable from one country, region or city to another.
5. Conclusion
This paper presents a review of evidence on the associations and modification effects between transportation noise in residential environments, people's self-reported response to noise and the wider determinants of health. The findings of this review suggest that transportation noise may affect people's health and well-being through a broad range of pathways and a holistic approach is needed to capture all the effects. For example, the cognitive and emotional response to noise may influence people's lifestyle, activities and behaviours, which could have an impact on social interactions as well as the local economy of the neighbourhood. Moreover, some features of the built and natural environment appear to influence people's cognitive and emotional response to noise and can have a positive impact on their mental health and well-being.
The findings indicate support for a holistic view when assessing the effects of noise and when designing measures to reduce noise impacts. On the one hand, there are potential effects of transportation noise that exist but are currently difficult to be accounted for in noise impact assessments, such as impacts on physical activity levels or impacts on people's recreational activities. On the other hand, a greater focus is needed in building and urban planning noise reduction measures. Elements of the built environment such as greenness, having access to a quiet area, and covering the noise source either visually or acoustically with natural features could be used to reduce negative noise impacts such as annoyance.
The number of studies matching each category was small, and strong heterogeneity was observed across studies in terms of methodology and indicators used. Consequently, the generalisability and comparability of the findings is limited. More studies are needed in order to strengthen the evidence in terms of types of associations, the extent of moderation by personal, situational and contextual factors and the causation pathways of the different correlations.
