Abstract
The relationship between transportation and public health has been a concern of policy and planning for decades, centering on air quality, safety, and physical activity. Despite improved understanding of transportation as an environmental determinant of health, we lack critical knowledge of how streets, traffic, and land use interact as social determinants of health. Streets are among the most important forms of public space in cities. As such, they display the material signs of social problems and neglect such as graffiti, drug and alcohol use, and squalor, which are known social pathways that affect health. This chapter provides a critical summary of how transportation and land use can be understood as a social pathway of health and health disparities. It illustrates this idea with the case of major arterial roads. Arterial roads are an explicit example of why social-ecological health impacts are increasingly a focus of transportation policy, particularly as cities and regions locate infill and transit-oriented development along high-traffic streets and highways.

1. Introduction
There are several points of entry into the question of how transportation and land use affect health behaviors and outcomes. Among the most discussed are physical activity, injury, exposure to air pollution, and noise. To understand these issues, research has usually defined transportation and land use as part of the physical environment. This chapter focuses on an aspect of the problem that has received relatively less attention: how motorized traffic, streets, and surrounding land uses are also social determinants of health.
The social impact of transportation is important for health, equity, and policy formulation. Streets are among the most important forms of public space in cities, serving the manifold demands of mobility and social life. As such, they display the material signs of social problems and neglect such as graffiti, drug and alcohol use, and squalor. These exposures are known social-ecological pathways that affect health and health disparities. The aim of this chapter is to provide a critical summary of how transportation and land use can be understood as part of these pathways. This is an interdisciplinary problem that requires forging understanding of physical design, behavior, psychosocial, and institutional factors. It is also a problem that can be mapped onto specific types of infrastructure such as major arterial roads and freeways, which are used as a case for this chapter.
Equity implications arise because the negative social impacts of transportation and land use disproportionately affect economically deprived neighborhoods and certain racial and ethnic groups. This occurs through higher exposure to traffic along arterials, arterials functioning as accessibility barriers, and disinvestment and physical decay along commercial strips, even if formal processes exist to prevent these impacts. From a policy perspective, cities and regions increasingly locate infill and transit-oriented development along arterials and the health effects of these changes, positive and negative, are mostly unknown.
The next sections situate transportation and land use, arterials in particular, in the broader field of health and place, and outline how stress associated with streets and traffic translates into health behaviors and outcomes. The final sections highlight key areas of prior investigation relating arterials to social factors, suggesting new challenges for research, policy, and practice.

2. Neighborhoods and Health
I locate this exploration of streets, traffic, and neighborhood social environments within the larger discussion of health and place. The field of population health investigates neighborhood-level social and physical determinants of health because personal characteristics, health behaviors, and access to quality healthcare do not sufficiently explain the causes and distribution of disease (Diez Roux & Mair, 2010; Evans & Stoddart, 1990; Frumkin, 2005). In particular, the social, economic, and built environments of neighborhoods—as well as the broader regional processes that shape them—influence health inequities by race, ethnicity, and socio-economic status in the short run and over a lifetime of exposure (Adler & Newman, 2002; Cummins, Curtis, Diez Roux, & Macintyre, 2007; Diez Roux & Mair, 2010; Do, 2009; Hedman, Manley, Van Ham, & Östh, 2013; Osypuk & Acevedo-Garcia, 2010). Three major areas of research are relevant to the role of transportation and land use as social determinants of health: (1) poverty, (2) segregation, and (3) the interaction between social and physical environments in neighborhoods.
2.1. Poverty and segregation
At an upstream level, neighborhoods contribute to health and health disparities because they are the physical manifestation of resource distribution (Ellen, Mijanovich, & Dillman, 2001). Individuals and families realize the advantages of education, income, and occupation through privileged access to protective social and physical environments (Adler and Newman, 2002, Angell, 1993). In general, people who experience poverty live, work, and carry out activities in places with relatively poor environmental quality, and this pathway leads to poorer health outcomes (Cushing, Morello-Frosch, Wander, & Pastor, 2015). Yet, the specific mechanisms of the neighborhood-health relationship, such as the role of transportation and land use, are not fully understood. Nor is it understood how the neighborhood-health relationship varies by gender, race, ethnicity, occupation, and other personal characteristics.
In addition to health disparities by socioeconomic status, neighborhoods contribute to racial and ethnic health disparities (Acevedo-Garcia, Lochner, Osypuk, & Subramanian, 2003; Cummins et al., 2007). Specifically, segregation makes it difficult to use residential sorting to invest in health through the selection of residential location (Hipp, 2011; Massey & Denton, 1993). The chronic exposure to neighborhood poverty caused by racial and ethnic segregation is a major cause of health disparities in United States and it is associated with mortality, teenage childbearing, tuberculosis, cardiovascular disease, lack of access to healthy food, and exposure to air pollution and toxics(Acevedo-Garcia et al., 2003, Do, 2009).
Transportation and land use together shape the landscape of poverty and segregation through inter-governmental policies that determine infrastructure investment, employment and housing patterns in regional economies, and local land use decisions (Hayden, 2009; Jackson, 1985; Liebs, 1995; Logan & Molotch, 1987; Loukaitou-Sideris, 1997, Mollenkopf, 1983, Thompson Fullilove, 2004). Transportation’s relationship to racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic inequalities have been direct, such as through higher investment in public transit for higher income riders, as well as indirect, such as through differential access to education, employment, and other opportunities (Golub, Marcantonio, & Sanchez, 2013; Sanchez, Stolz, & Ma, 2004; Bullard, 2004).
2.2. Neighborhood physical and social environments
It is well known that exposure to traffic is a significant health burden because of externalities such as air pollution, noise, and safety hazards. For example, extensive public health literature has established the connection between air pollution and respiratory disease, certain types of cancer, cardiovascular disease, and adverse birth outcomes (Anderson, Thundiyil, & Stolbach, 2012; Babisch, 2014; Sapkota, Chelikowsky, Nachman, Cohen, Ritz, 2012). Heavy traffic is also associated with higher injury rates, especially on arterial roads and in lower income neighborhoods (Morency, Gauvin, Plante, Fournier, & Morency, 2012).
Persistent racial and socioeconomic inequalities in exposure to heavy traffic is yet another challenge. Estimates of the proportion of the US population living close to high-traffic roads range from 4% to 19%, depending on the definition of the road type and assumptions about distance. These proportions are higher for people of color and low-income households, as well as for people who are foreign born and people who do not speak English at home (Boehmer, Foster, Henry, Woghiten-Akinnifesi, & Yip, 2013; Rowangould, 2013). In California, children of color are three times as likely to live close to heavy traffic as white children, and minority and low-income neighborhoods have twice the traffic density of the regional average (Gunier, Hertz, Von Behren, & Reynolds, 2003; Houston, Wu, Ong, & Winer, 2004; Tian, Xue, & Barzyk, 2013).
Research on transportation and health has captured these physical pathways, but the social pathways through which traffic, streets, and land use influence health are not well understood. Based on the public health literature, we know that the interconnected social and physical environments of neighborhoods are necessary for health promotion (Cummins et al., 2007; Diez Roux & Mair, 2010; Winkel, Saegert, & Evans, 2009; Yen & Syme, 1999). We also know that place-based community factors such as social cohesion, collective efficacy, social networks, physical and relational accessibility, and the maintenance of social norms are related to health (Diez Roux & Mair, 2010; Ellen et al., 2001; Sampson & Raudenbush, 1999; Yen & Syme, 1999). What is not yet known is how transportation and land use operate as neighborhood-level social and physical factors that influence health outcomes.
The presence of neglect and physical decay in neighborhoods—as well as the perception of neglect and physical decay—may be a critical social pathway for transportation and land use. For instance, bus stops, residential back alleys, commercial strips, and arterial roads with heavy traffic have all been associated with neglect and physical decay (Appleyard, 1981; Liggett, Loukaitou-Sideris, & Iseki, 2001; Loukaitou-Sideris, 1999; McAndrews, Flórez, & Deakin, 2006; McAndrews & Marcus, 2014; Wolch et al., 2010).
Evidence of neglect and physical decay is part of a larger “broken windows” theory that litter, graffiti, abandoned lots, and blight represent diminished social control in public spaces, which, in turn, invites more neglect, physical decay, and even crime. What is important for transportation-health relationship is that these incivilities in neighborhoods are sources of chronic stress, and they shape health-related behaviors in both urban and nonmetropolitan places (Ellaway et al., 2009, Frumkin, 2005; Reisig & Cancino, 2004; Ross & Mirowsky, 1999; Ross & Mirowsky, 2001; Skogan, 2012; Wilson & Kelling, 1982). Nevertheless, it is not clear whether actions to improve quality of life through “broken windows policing” or other methods is effective in reducing felony crime or even street-level incivilities. Its effectiveness depends on the type of police enforcement used, and the negative consequences of zero-tolerance policing can have serious negative effects on community cohesion (Braga & Bond, 2008).
Interpreting neglect and physical decay in transportation environments requires a nuanced understanding of public space and how norms operate in transportation environments. Thinking of Jakarta, Indonesia, Lo (2009) understands the public space of streets, as well as transit networks, as the coincidence of two things: the flows of global networks and places for everyday life. The public spaces of streets serve as the place where global flows and the places of everyday life intersect. Therefore, streets are also places that reflect resistance to the spatial logic of global development and the consequences of being excluded from this global development. This is why the material traces of street-level poverty can also be understood as markers of political conflict, the source of which is an ongoing contest about the distribution of the costs and benefits of road networks, information networks, and other material and non-material engagement with global flows. Pedestrians are a case in point. In some contexts, walking is a symbol of health and economic vitality. Cities conduct analyses of the economic benefit of pedestrian spaces. In other contexts, walking is a symbol of poverty, where walking is not considered a problem of mobility or transportation but rather a problem of the poor. In a similar way, we can read signs of neglect and decay in the public space offered by streets as part of these larger social, economic, and political struggles.

3. Transportation and land use as social determinants of health in neighborhood
Transportation has a strong social framework. Understood with a first-order perspective, travel is inherently social because it captures the geography of daily life in time and space. Travel behavior is influenced by social and ecological factors such as family, work, and infrastructure. Understood with a second-order perspective, the provision and consumption of transportation services, including infrastructure, vehicles, operations, and programming, results in social and economic impacts such as changes in travel time, cost, and options; accessibility; and community cohesion (Geurs, Boon, & Van Wee, 2009; Forkenbrock, Benshoff, & Weisbrod, 2001; FHWA, 1996). In many instances, formal analysis of the social impacts of transportation projects is legally mandated, for example by Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, the 1969 National Environmental Policy Act, the 1991 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act, and the 1994 Executive Order 12898 on Environmental Justice. However, practitioners in transportation work with “insufficient methods, tools, and techniques” to fully assess the social impact of transportation projects (Forkenbrock et al., 2001).
One of the missing tools is fundamental knowledge of how the social impact of transportation interacts with its health impact. Two potential pathways that link the social impact of transportation to health impact are chronic stress and behavior, which are proposed causal pathways between neighborhood and health (Ellen et al., 2001).
3.1. Chronic stress
Chronic stress is a potential mechanism relating neighborhood and health, particularly mental health and depressive symptoms (Aneshensel, 2010, Gilster, 2014, Kim, 2008; Mair, Roux, & Galea, 2008). Chronic stress results from the perception that aspects of the physical and social environment are exceedingly burdensome (Cohen, Janicki-Deverts, & Miller, 2007; Pearlin, Menaghan, Lieberman, & Mullan, 1981). It is associated with diseases such as clinical depression, cardiovascular disease, human immunodeficiency virus, and cancer (Cohen et al., 2007), and it affects people differentially by individual characteristics such as race (Gilster, 2014).
For instance, people who live close to sources of pollution (e.g., toxic waste sites, refineries, and incinerators) have two problems. First, they suffer exposure to harmful chemicals. Second, they suffer chronic stress caused by their awareness of this exposure, and this chronic stress results in additional adverse mental health outcomes (Neutra, Lipscomb, Satin, & Shusterman, 1991; Yang & Matthews, 2010). In Philadelphia, Kondo et al. (2014) conducted focus group discussions with neighbors of a refinery and found that their awareness of the pollution, the sense of stigma that they experienced because of living in a polluted neighborhood, and their fear of displacement contributed to chronic stress. This is one example of emerging research on the effects of non-chemical pathways associated with environmental hazards, and it could serve as a model for understanding the impact of transportation and land use.
Exposure to motorized traffic has been included among the various aspects of the physical environment that may contribute to stress. Gee and Takeuchi (2004) and Song, Gee, Fan, and Takeuchi (2007) used multi-level statistical models to investigate how traffic stress and objective measures of the transportation environment affected general health and depressive symptoms. Traffic stress was self-reported and centered on the degree to which one was bothered by traffic, auto maintenance, and traffic crashes. Environmental stress was also self-reported and centered on physical conditions of the neighborhood, noise, pollution, and crime. Vehicular burden in the neighborhood was measured as the percent of persons age 16 or older who drive or take public transportation to work in a given census tract, but no measure of on-street traffic volumes was included. The study found that those who reported traffic stress and who also lived in neighborhood with a high vehicular burden had significantly lower well-being than those living in areas with a lower vehicular burden, as measured by both general health status and for depressive symptoms. The perception of poor neighborhood conditions was associated with depression, but this association was no longer significant after traffic stress was included in the model. Song et al. (2007) replicated the original study with more detailed information about the built environment. This second study’s results were consistent with those of the first study, and they found that the ratio of land area devoted to parks moderated the relationship between traffic stress and well-being. In addition, neighborhoods with more major streets were more problematic, and the presence of restorative green spaces may mitigate these negative traffic and roadway externalities. In both of these studies, the constructs of people suffering from traffic stress and environmental stress may suffer from problems of construct validity because it is unclear whether the stress results from exposure to vehicular traffic, from traveling in motor vehicles, or some other combination of traffic and travel-related exposure.
Using traffic volume measures in multi-level models, Yang and Matthews (2010) and Matthews and Yang (2010) found that two explanatory variables—heavy traffic and a composite measure of the physical environment—were associated with higher self-reported stress. They also found that neighborhood-level socioeconomic status and crime did not associate with self-reported stress after controlling for the built environment. With respect to the study’s design, it is possible that survey respondents found it easier to respond to visual cues of social threats than to other representations of social threats, and therefore these methods could overstate the effect of the built environment on stress (Yang & Matthews, 2010). These studies did not report specific thresholds for traffic volumes that associate with higher stress.
In addition to chronic stress, relationships between personality and neighborhood environment might be meaningful for health. A multi-level study investigating the relationship between physical environment and psychological wellbeing found an association between the ambient stressors of neighborhoods (air pollution, noise, and traffic) and cynical hostility, which is a personality trait associated with heart disease and depression (King, 2012). Thus, there are a number of ways that everyday exposure to traffic and streets could influence individual-level health and health behaviors.
3.2. Behavior
Walkability is another field that has adopted a social-ecological framing of transportation environments. Land use, connectivity, and the density of activities are known to influence mode choice and therefore physical activity through active modes of travel (Ding, Sallis, Kerr, Lee, & Rosenberg, 2011). In addition, environmental qualities such as aesthetics, naturalness and presence of vegetation, and perceived safety influence active travel (Nasar, 2015).
In addition to features of the physical environment, a variety of social factors influence the propensity to walk. For instance, perceived safety is important, and the construct of safety often takes two meanings. One meaning is fear of traffic. A second meaning is fear of crime. Fear of crime and social disorder are cited as factors that are central to individuals’ decisions to walk (Griffin, Wilson, Wilcox, Buck, & Ainsworth, 2007; Roman & Chalfin, 2008 ). If disorder in the built and social environments leads to stress and fear, this may affect health directly through stress mechanisms, as well as indirectly by discouraging health-promoting behavior such as walking or using parks and playgrounds (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2006; Ross & Mirowsky, 2001). However, empirical evidence about the crime-physical activity connection is mixed, potentially because of different constructs and methodologies used (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2006; Saelens & Handy, 2008).

4. The case of major arterial roads
If streets, traffic, and land use combine into an important social-ecological pathway that influences individual and community health, then major arterial roads may be a critical type of infrastructure implicated in this relationship. Arterial roads are streets that carry high volumes of fast traffic. Urban transportation systems depend on them for everyday travel, serving transit routes, facilitating goods distribution, and connecting local traffic to regional expressways. They are an important case for both research and intervention in the transportation-health relationship. First, arterial roads carry high volumes of traffic, which means that they are corridors of concentrated negative externalities such as noise, pollution, and safety hazards. Second, in addition to their mobility function, arterials also serve as commercial strip developments that mark the edges of residential neighborhoods, which implies that they also concentrate exposure to the negative externalities of traffic as well as the potential benefits of this proximity. Third, arterial roads are associated with neglect and physical decay in cities and they are public spaces where road users of all types can be exposed to such incivilities.
This section focuses on how arterial roads are a useful case example of the interaction of social and physical factors in the context of transportation and land use. We know that arterial roads—their traffic, design, and surrounding land use contexts—associate with neglect and physical decay. But which features of arterials matter most? Is it the land use context, the heavy traffic, or the interaction of these and other factors? Similarly, do the traffic, street design, and land uses only reflect surrounding social contexts, or can they influence social contexts? How could interventions in the street design, traffic operations, and land use of arterial roads be used as a tool for addressing the perception of crime? The following sections explore two social dimensions of arterial roads that plausibly relate to health behaviors and outcomes: the presence of neglect and physical decay along arterials and their role as accessibility barrier that leads to community severance and social isolation.
4.1. Streets and land uses that associate with neglect and physical decay
Major arterial roads are a specific type of infrastructure developed within the highway paradigm of transportation planning and they are a landscape in their own right. In the early 20th century, urban planners and traffic engineers promoted arterial roads as a way to channel motorized traffic away from residential subdivisions, therefore minimizing traffic exposure to protected residential neighborhoods. At the same time, this strategy accommodated increasing demand for regional mobility as jobs and housing located farther away from city centers (Buchanan, 1963, FHWA, 1997). In the inner suburbs, many arterial roads are configured as main streets because they were created along the right-of-way of former streetcar lines, surrounded by neighborhood-serving retail. In contemporary settings, arterials function as highways with larger-scale strip development.
A key feature of arterial roads is that they provide access to surrounding land uses, which compromises their ideal-type mobility function and distinguishes them from freeways. In practice, arterials serve multiple types of road users and multiple transportation modes. However, because they have been designed with modified highway standards that allow for heavy, fast traffic, this combination of mobility and access results in conflicts. Some of the conflicts are physical, such as the problem of pedestrian safety. Other conflicts are discursive, such as debate about their design and which users should be prioritized.
Arterial roads are also social places. Older main streets were locations for commerce as well as churches, theaters, memorials, libraries and they were “the ideal setting for speeches, parades, and celebrations” (Liebs, 1985, p. 8). However, when freeway bypasses were built, inner suburb and downtown arterials lost traffic and business declined. At the same time, new development occurred farther in the suburbs and inner suburbs and downtowns faced the dual-impact of decline and urban renewal, leaving many arterial roads and commercial strips empty, boarded up, and decaying (Liebs, 1985; Loukaitou-Sideris, 1997). Today, some of these strips have been revitalized, but the vast majority continue to serve primarily as traffic and fast-food corridors with mixed reputations as unsavory but useful for travel and consumption (Hurvitz, Moudon, Rehm, Streichert, & Drewnowski, 2009). At the same time, they serve essential neighborhood functions such as providing access to retail and transportation services, particularly in places where nearby residents have limited access to automobiles (Loukaitou-Sideris, 1997).
Although not all arterial roads are characterized by the presence of neglect and physical decay, these social problems associate with arterial roads and specifically with commercial strip development in inner cities and suburbs. Surveys of nearby residents, business owners, and developers have been a main source for data about the nature of arterial roads and what characteristics of these places influence neighbors’ and users’ quality of life. Survey respondents and focus group participants discuss the presence of gangs, drug dealing, and prostitution as well as needles, graffiti, litter, and a lack of maintenance as problems that negatively affect their neighborhoods (Loukaitou-Sideris, 1997, Loukaitou-Sideris, 2000; McAndrews et al., 2006; Mejias & Deakin, 2005). Business owners call attention to surrounding poverty as a challenge (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2000). In addition to social problems, neighbors are also concerned about traditional transportation issues such as the speed of traffic, pedestrian safety, and parking.
Bus stops and residential back alleys are two additional examples of transportation environments that have been framed as both social and physical environments. Research about crime around bus stops using multivariate statistical models found that a mix of locational, land use, and design features associate with higher police-reported crime rates at bus stops. Higher crime rates at bus stops associate with specific bus stop locations, undesirable establishments such as liquor stores, and the presence of litter. Lower crime rates are associated with pedestrian presence and good visibility of the bus stop from nearby establishments (Liggett et al., 2001). Traffic volumes on the streets did not affect crime rates. These findings about bus stops are consistent with research about undesirable land uses, and they support the idea that certain non-residential land uses elevate the perception of crime (McCord, Ratcliffe, Garcia, & Taylor, 2007).
Residential back alleys are a second context in which land use, design, and social disorder intersect. Residential back alleys, similar to arterials, serve a utility function. They are places for residential storage, waste pick-up, and driveways and garages that offer access. They are only semi-public spaces, and they are somewhat hidden (Martin, 1996, Martin, 2000). As such, they also have problems such as litter and graffiti. In focus group discussions, residents associated their back alleys with illicit activities (Wolch et al., 2010). Municipalities and neighborhood organizations have used clean-up and greening programs to improve the conditions of back alleys, but these revitalization programs face limitations. For example, alley programs that emphasized green infrastructure did not easily adopt social equity goals as part of their agendas, and the signs of disorder that had once been located on alleys that received revitalization treatments simply moved to nearby alleys that had not received the interventions (Newell et al., 2013; Seymour, Wolch, Reynolds, & Bradbury, 2010).
The literature on neglect and physical decay in neighborhood has often relied on observation of streets, traffic, and land use, but, with the exception of investigations of bus stops and residential back alleys, it has not been concerned with transportation environments per se. How does the heavy traffic on arterial roads influence the social norms of public space on streets, and how are operations and design strategies used to shape social norms even in the presence of heavy traffic (Appleyard, 1981)? Could street design and infrastructure improvements prevent incivilities, or are these interventions limited to changing perceptions of incivilities?
4.2. Barriers that lead to community severance and social isolation
Arterial roads are social barriers because of the presence of neglect and physical decay as well as physical barriers because of their design and traffic. Their function as a barrier is another potential pathway through which they affect individual and community health. The phrase community severance refers to these barriers, and is defined as the “…cumulative impact of psychological and physical barriers to movement and social participation, created by the transport infrastructure…” (James, Millington, & Tomlinson, 2005). Community severance is associated with a larger problem of social and economic isolation in communities, resulting from the combination of heavy traffic and poor accessibility (Geurs et al., 2009). Accessibility is a critical metric for evaluating the fundamental benefits offered by transportation systems, particularly for elderly and people with disabilities (Decker, 2006, Golub and Martens, 2014). It is not clear if mainstream transportation planning practice has the tools, methods, and resources to engage with this problem (James et al., 2005).
Community severance is directly linked to well-being as it affects accessibility and physical mobility, which are health promoting aspects of well-being (Delbosc, 2012). Heavy traffic, in particular, is a known contributor to community severance and diminished social capital (Anciaes, Boniface, Dhanani, Mindell, & Groce, 2016; Appleyard, 1981). In a qualitative community-based study of arterials and health, McAndrews and Marcus (2014) found that accessibility barriers, along with social disorder and direct exposure to hazards, were central to residents’ perception of the negative externalities of the large arterial road.

5. Implications for policy, planning, and design
The conflicts present for the case of arterial roads resemble a larger problem in urban design: how streets and other transportation infrastructure contribute to a sense of place while at the same time functioning as part of a regional network (Belzer, Autler, Espinosa, Feigon, & Ohland, 2004; Bertolini, 1996). For the case of arterial roads, this means asking how to combine street design, land use, and other programming to create streets with significant traffic capacity accompanied by significant social capacity. Arterials may be a critical element for urban policies such as infill housing, enhanced transit service, and transit-oriented development, particularly as growth continues in central cities and inner suburbs (Beyard, Pawlukiewicz, & Bond, 2003; Cherry, Deakin, Higgins, & Huey, 2006; Mejias & Deakin, 2005). But each of these initiatives requires both a high quality of place and a high level of mobility, which are competing demands.
5.1. Traffic operations and design strategies
The difficulties of urban arterial roads have been documented in planning, engineering, urban design, and public health literature (Dowling, Flannery, Landis, Petritsch, Rouphail, & Ryus, 2008; Dumbaugh & Rae, 2009; Hebbert, 2005; Miles-Doan & Thompson, 1999; Mindell & Karlsen, 2012). These difficulties range from travel delay and travel time unreliability to exposure to traffic safety hazards, direct exposure to noise and near-roadway pollution, and physical barriers that limit access and lead to community severance. With respect to the physical aspects of street, traffic volumes, traffic speed, noise levels, the potential to support transit, and the attractiveness of the streetscape are all important characteristics (McAndrews et al., 2006; Mejias & Deakin 2005; Seto, Holt, Rivard, & Bhatia, 2007).
Research about arterials has focused on two aspects of design. The first emphasizes the multi-modal boulevard; the second emphasizes design and operations for public transit. Research about boulevards and other multi-use streets accepts that traffic and livability are reconcilable through design (Jacobs, 1993; Jacobs, Macdonald, & Rofe, 2002). In fact, traffic can make certain streets dynamic and interesting, despite also being a source of noise and pollution. In particular, street design can be used to buffer neighbors and road users from noise, pollution, and other negative effects of traffic. Research about boulevard designs found that residents living along them are happy despite the traffic, and that these major roads can be more livable than nearby streets with lower traffic volumes (Bosselmann, Macdonald, & Kronemeyer, 1999). In this way, accepting car traffic as an element of neighborhood vitality allows one to ask questions that are critical for contemporary transportation policy, such as how to design for transit-oriented and residential infill development in settings where cars remain a priority.
A second approach has focused on the design and operations strategies that make major arterial roads successful transit streets (Cherry et al., 2006). These strategies include transit operations, traffic operations, geometric design, pedestrian improvements, as well as land use strategies. Design can be a successful technique, but it needs a strong urban design, land use, and transit service framework, not only a complete streets design template.
5.2. Greening and cues to care
Beautification, specifically greening of vacant lots, has been another response to crime and social disorder in neighborhoods. Greening has been associated with reductions in gun assault incidents in Philadelphia and lower crime rates in Baltimore (Branas et al., 2011; Troy, Grove, & O’Neil-Dunne, 2012). One potential mechanism causing the decreases in crime may be that surveillance is easier in places that are more tidy and transparent.
A second mechanism may be that greening is an expression of care and that a green, maintained landscape is a cultural sign that cultivates trust (Nassauer, 1995). There are several proposed pathways between greening and health, including physical activity, reducing stress, and increasing social contact. Contact with nature is considered protective against adverse mental health outcomes, cardiovascular disease, and overall mortality (James et al., 2015; Hartig et al., 2015). Contact with nature in urban settings is usually framed as access to parks and community gardens, but green streets may have health co-benefits if they are well maintained (EPA, 2008). For example, residential arterials designed as boulevards were used for exercise such as walking, jogging, and bicycling, and they were used as parks where people would walk dogs, interact, or sit and watch the activity (Bosselmann et al., 1999).
5.3. Infill, revitalization, and community development strategies
Urban revitalization is a key strategy for dealing with social disorder along commercial strips. For example, during a period of economic revitalization along an arterial in the San Francisco Bay Area in California, street activity increased and criminal activity decreased. This decline in criminal activity was favorable for infill housing and commercial development because lenders were more willing to finance projects as the neighborhoods became safer (Mejias & Deakin, 2005).
However, the transformation of commercial strips is also part of the gentrification process that affects businesses and residents alike, and these changes may be contested (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2002, Minner, 2013). For instance, an Urban Land Institute report about revitalization of neighborhood retail suggested that “high-quality” residents can help turn around a neighborhood (Beyard et al., 2003). This framing seems to suggest that place-based public health practices are speculative processes whereby cities attract healthy people with relatively higher incomes to changing neighborhoods. Instead, future practice needs to be explicit about how it includes the needs of current residents.
Supporting retail and land uses that are active at night are typical goals of revitalization strategies for arterial roads, but even in places where active land uses are strong, retail and other active land uses cannot be located continuously along every road. This is a challenge for neighborhoods of all income levels, and the problem has voluntary, market, regulatory aspects. One approach is to support the formation of merchant associations that serve the important role of community building among business and other groups (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2000). Local governments can help by creating policies that support local retail, such as tax rebates for improvements, access to financing, programs to facilitate storefront façade improvements, and zoning that concentrates retail development at nodes instead of all along a corridor (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2000).

6. Conclusion
Transportation and land use should be understood as social determinants of health, not only physical determinants of health. This is because social pathways are primary mechanisms through which built environments affect individual and community health. Transportation and land use can be conceptualized in a social-ecological framework that is consistent with the nature of travel as well as the nature of population health.
These social determinants of health may operate at multiple scales. Through investments in transportation services, the siting of infrastructure, and the standards for development, transportation and land use relate to poverty and segregation, which are upstream social processes that influence health and health disparities at a regional level. At the site level, the combination of streets, traffic, and land use are social environments and, as such, they display social problems such as crime, disorder, and physical decay. These multi-scalar social exposures work in combination, and may “get under the skin” through mechanisms such as chronic stress and behavior.
Arterial roads are a case example that exemplifies both the physical and social dimensions of the transportation-health relationship. Arterial roads carry high volumes of fast traffic, and they concentrate exposure to air pollution, noise, and safety hazards. The difficult aspects of high traffic volumes can be mitigated through built-environment and traffic-related interventions—or by reducing traffic altogether—but the social aspects of arterial roads are equally important. In addition to their role as travel corridors, arterial roads are also important neighborhood assets. In particular, they are places that nearby residents use with some frequency, despite their traffic and related hazards. However, arterial roads, particularly those with commercial strip development, are prone to concentrate social disorder such as graffiti, litter, and alcohol and drug use. Actual and perceived social disorder is a source of stress for neighbors and it may create a barrier that diminishes social cohesion and increases social isolation.
Therefore, arterials also serve as an opportunity to develop transportation-health interventions within a social-ecological model. Potential interventions include transportation design and operations strategies, land use strategies and revitalization, and greening and maintenance programs that express cues to care. These interventions are not traditional “transportation” projects and they will typically fall outside the scope of mainstream transportation planning activities, particularly on state-owned roads. In addition, working within a social-ecological model of transportation and land use will also require an expanded set of partners, including social work, law enforcement, and the maintenance function of public works departments and their contractors.
Economic growth and demographic change in cities has prompted infill development and neighborhood change along arterial corridors. The effects of these changes on individual and community health are unknown. A next step for future research is to use experimental research designs, as well as qualitative and environmental design methods, to evaluate the causal effects of livability interventions on arterials to better understand the interdependence of the quantity and quality of traffic, the social features of arterials, and the impacts on individual and community health.