Abstract

    It is well recognized that transportation is a barrier to healthcare access for rural-dwelling residents, particularly
    older adults. Healthcare restructuring initiatives seldom take into consideration the complexity of transportation,
    which acts as a barrier to appropriate and timely access to healthcare services for older adults in rural com­
    munities. This article presents findings of a qualitative research study that explored the complex nature of
    transportation challenges that rural-dwelling older adults experience in Western Canada when trying to access
    primary and community care services. Data were derived from a larger study of service user views on a
    healthcare restructuring initiative intended to facilitate aging-in-place. We conducted 15 focus groups and 9
    interviews with a diverse sample of 83 older adults living in one urban centre and nine rural and small rural
    towns in British Columbia (BC)’s interior. We used content analysis to determine codes and derive themes. Study
    findings showed that transportation was a top priority for improving primary and community care. Older adult
    participants identified a range of transportation challenges in trying to get to healthcare services and care
    providers getting to them. Transportation was a social determinant of health (SDOH) for all participants,
    regardless of whether they lived in the urban centre or in a rural or small rural town. Our study provides more
    evidence to support that transportation is a key SDOH for rural-dwelling older adults. As such, transportation
    should be specifically addressed in healthcare restructuring initiatives that aim to support aging-in-place. Service
    providers need to advocate for system-wide solutions such as integrating transportation into the healthcare
    system, while it is imperative that decision-makers act on these solutions.

Introduction
    As older adults living in rural and semi urban areas increase in age,
    their mobility often decreases (Mattson, 2010). One key component of
    their mobility is transportation (Webber, Porter, & Menec, 2010).
    Reliable transportation provides access to needed healthcare services,
    helps maintain social connections, and is vital for communities to be
    considered healthy. People with limited access to transportation may
    experience delayed medical appointments, poor health outcomes, and
    increased utilization of health care services – all of which increase
    healthcare costs (Health Research & Educational Trust, 2017). However,
    the restructuring of healthcare services does not always take into
    consideration transportation as a social determinant of health (SDOH)
    and the complex role it plays in impacting health outcomes of older
    adults, particularly those who live in rural and remote regions. This
    paper reports on the multifaceted nature of transportation as a social

    determinant of health by drawing on the perspective of older adults
    living in the interior of British Columbia (BC), Canada. The paper un­
    earths the lack of transportation options, particularly in BC’s rural re­
    gions, and discusses their negative impact on older adults’ ability to age
    in place.
Background
    In designing a restructuring initiative to promote aging-in-place,
    Interior Health (IH), one of six health authorities in BC, decided that
    specific social determinants of health (SDOH) “need to be addressed and
    mitigated” and specifically named transportation, along with housing,
    food security, limited financial resources, and social connectedness
    (Kamloops Local Action Team [LAT], 2015, p. 3). SDOH are the social
    and environmental factors that negatively impact health and cause or
    exacerbate disease. The most well-known and utilized Canadian SDOH

    models include 12 (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010) or 14 (Health Canada,
    2019) determinants, including income (distribution and social status),
    education, housing, employment and working conditions, gender, social
    exclusion/supports, (access to) health services, and childhood devel­
    opment/experiences. While neither of these models include trans­
    portation, the crucial role of transportation for older adults’ access to
    health care services is widely understood by social gerontologists and
    geographers (Chappell, 2021), and addressed within the context of rural
    transportation options (Hansen et al., 2021). While Kamloops LAT
    (2015) did include transportation as a SDOH, the recommendations
    arising from their health service restructuring plan for older adults did
    not include solutions to mitigate known and unknown transportation
    problems experienced by older adults, particularly those dwelling in
    rural areas.
    The Office of the Seniors Advocate, (2018) identified the following
    options for those BC seniors who can no longer drive: ask family and
    friends, walk, use public transit, take HandyDART, call a taxicab, and
    use volunteer driver programs. HandyDART is a free public trans­
    portation service for older adults and persons with disabilities; clients
    need to register with HandyDART, and pre-book all trips two business
    days in advance. Volunteer driver programs are run by non-profit or­
    ganizations like the Canadian Cancer Society or by local seniors’ centers,
    neighborhood houses, and faith communities; 85 such programs
    currently exist in BC (Office of the Seniors Advocate, 2018). Not all of
    these transportation options are available throughout the province,
    however.
    According to the BC Ministry of Health (BC MOH, 2015), there are
    differences in the types and availability of transportation options be­
    tween remote communities (<1000 people), small rural towns (1000 to
    3500 people), rural towns (3500 to 20,000 people), small urban (20,000
    to 75,000), urban (75,000 to 175,000 people), and large urban (more
    than 175,000 people). For example, there is no taxi service in some rural
    communities in interior BC and HandyDART does not pick up or drop off
    Elders who live “on reserve” (i.e., in First Nation communities). How­
    ever, First Nation Elders who are residents of BC are eligible to receive
    medical transportation benefits from the First Nations Health Authority
    (FNHA, 2019), and this covers some of the costs of accommodation,
    meals, and mileage. Older adults and their families and communities
    must fill in the gaps and assume any additional costs.
    Due to the limited or unaffordable transportation options available,
    advocacy groups like the BC Alliance for Healthy Living (2019) call for
    increased transportation options for small towns and rural communities,
    noting the need to expand HandyDART service to include evenings,
    Sundays, and holidays; and engage the health authorities in creating
    ways to ensure health care access. For older adults who must travel to
    urban centers for non-emergency medical appointments, there is also
    the Health Connections bus which runs up to two days per week between
    rural and small rural towns and urban centers and must be booked two
    business days in advance. Using this service requires a lot of coordina­
    tion and results in a long day. Rural residents traveling for non-medical
    reasons can take the bus as well; however, this is subject to space and
    thus older adults cannot be assured of accompaniment when they travel
    for medical appointments. This poses a significant barrier for older
    adults experiencing frailty, cognitive or sensory impairments, or mental
    health challenges, should they require assistance traveling to and/or
    attending medical appointments.
    Studies on health care restructuring find transportation to be a bar­
    rier to older adults accessing health care services, particularly in rural
    and remote communities. Case study research in Atlantic Canada found
    discrepancies between rural and urban geographies, including fewer
    services and practitioners and poor transportation (Davenport, Rath­
    well, & Rosenberg, 2005). Further, a critical ethnography of rural aging
    and health disparities in the southwestern United States stressed that
    restructuring efforts need to address transportation solutions for older
    adults in isolated communities if improved community-based care is the
    goal (Averill, 2012). Through focus groups with clients, informal

    caregivers, and health care providers on system improvements, Lafor­
    tune, Huson, Santi, and Stolee (2015) identified transportation as a
    barrier, but only for rural participants. Similarly, a study to identify
    imminent changes for health care providers in Northern BC (Hanlon &
    Halseth, 2005) found a lack of services for older adults and recom­
    mended housing and transportation be examined for older adults in
    rural communities.
    A key element of aging-in-place determined by an Australian study
    with community-dwelling older adults was transport (Grimmer, Kay,
    Foot, & Pastakia, 2015). Another study found inadequate transportation
    to be a barrier to social support for older Chinese and Malay adults living
    alone in rural areas of Malaysia (Evans, Allotey, Imelda, Reidpath, &
    Pool, 2018). Likewise, public transportation was a recommended policy
    intervention to facilitate aging in rural Canada (Bascu et al., 2014; see
    also Seniors Advocate of BC, 2018). Groups of older adults are more
    adversely affected by transportation barriers than others, including low
    income, female, less educated, older and minority individuals (Syed,
    Gerber, & Sharp, 2013). For example, Call et al.’s (2006) survey research
    on access to health care services found that 39% of American Indians
    experienced transportation barriers in contrast to only 18% of nonHispanic White Americans. Older adults living with disabilities are not
    included in Syed et al.’s (2013) list of those more impacted by trans­
    portation barriers, yet this is likely due to the biomedicalization of aging
    or the equating of ‘older’ with ‘disabled’.
    Transportation challenges are not easy to resolve. A survey of 1373
    people in 56 communities in Manitoba (Canadian province) examined
    age-friendliness and showed that “transportation options” was one of
    the few community characteristics of age-friendliness that are difficult
    to improve due to the inability of rural communities to provide transport
    services (Menec et al., 2013). To respond to the few studies exploring
    regional transportation needs of older adults, a northern BC study by
    Ryser and Halseth (2012) drew upon several qualitative studies
    involving 365 key informants to conclude that mobility constraints
    hinder rural seniors’ access to regionalized care and health services.
    They also highlighted the need for senior-appropriate transport services
    that connect with First Nation reserves. While the studies stress the need
    for health care administrators and policy makers to act on transportation
    to improve rural aging, they do not present a service user perspective on
    the complex nature of transportation as it pertains to health care
    restructuring initiatives. The purpose of this paper is to describe trans­
    portation issues from the perspective of older adults living in an urban
    center (UC), two rural towns (RTs), and seven small rural towns (SRTs)
    who took part in the ROAR (Researching Older Adults’ Repositioning)
    study, which sought to explore older adults’ views on a restructuring
    initiative in BC’s interior (Hulko, Mirza, & Seeley, 2020).
Methods
    The Research Ethics Boards of the University (101229) and the local
    health authority (2016-17-011-I) approved this study. Data were
    collected from July to November 2016. Ten communities participated

    (see Table 1), including one UC (Kamloops), two RTs (Merritt and
    Williams Lake), and seven SRTs (Ashcroft, 100 Mile House, Logan Lake,
    Lillooet, Clearwater, Barriere, and Chase). These communities were
    selected based on their proximity to Kamloops and because they access
    the Royal Inland Hospital in Kamloops rather than any other tertiary
    health care center within BC’s interior, known as Thompson Cariboo
    Shuswap, or IH West (see Fig. 1). Kamloops is an UC approximately 220
    miles northeast of Vancouver, BC. Kamloops has a population of
    approximately 103,000 and is one of two health care hubs (the other
    being Kelowna) that serve BC’s interior. The distance from Kamloops to
    the farthest participating community (Williams Lake) is approximately
    180 miles.
    Through convenience and snowball sampling, we recruited 83
    community-dwelling participants from IH’s home and community care
    program, walk-in clinics, organizations such as the Council on Aging,
    and seniors’ social groups and centers in the participating communities.
    We included adults who were 65 years or older and had used primary
    and community care services in their home communities. We made a
    particular effort to include older adults who lived with chronic health
    conditions. The research assistants (RAs) circulated study information
    through community agencies and senior centers and made trips to put up
    posters and recruit participants. The team also made efforts to recruit
    Indigenous and South Asian participants by visiting a First Nation
    community and the Aboriginal Friendship Society, as well as a Sikh
    temple. All study participants were provided with an honorarium of $20
    Canadian.
    We collected data through 15 focus groups and nine interviews
    across the 10 communities, using a structured interview guide. In­
    terviews were audio-recorded by the research team and then converted
    into text by a professional transcriptionist. We used NVivo 10 software
    to support the qualitative data analysis process. Through content anal­
    ysis Hsieh and Shannon (2005), we determined codes and then clustered
    and collapsed them into themes. We consulted with the ROAR research
    advisory committee (consisting of IH decision-makers and knowledge
    users) to help us interpret the study findings. We also returned to the
    participating communities to share our results as part of an integrated
    knowledge translation process. We derived four themes from our anal­
    ysis: (1) unfamiliarity with IH’s repositioning; (2) optimism versus skepti­
    cism; (3) improving primary care and community care (through better

    home care, improved transportation, and more doctors); and, (4) playing
    an active role to effect change (Hulko et al., 2020).
    Improved transportation was one of the ROAR participants’ top
    priorities for the restructuring of primary and community care, the other
    two being (1) better home care services and (2) more doctors, better
    doctors, and “proper” doctors (Hulko et al., 2020). During the data
    analysis process, we discovered that transportation was a far more
    complex issue than we had anticipated. While we summarized the
    transportation issues in our 2020 publication, this article includes our
    full results and situates our findings on transportation as a SDOH within
    the context of transportation options currently available for older adults
    in BC, and the impact this has on rural older adults’ access to health care
    services.
Findings
    The 83 community-dwelling older adults (56 women, 27 men) that
    participated in the ROAR study consisted of residents from Kamloops
    (26.5%) as well as rural towns (73.5%). Their average age was 75 years
    (range: 62 to 89), 53% had complex chronic disease (i.e., two or more
    chronic conditions), 16% identified as Indigenous, and 8% were South
    Asian. More than half (58%) of participants lived on an income of less
    than $30,000 per year. Unsurprisingly, transportation was a major topic
    of conversation in all the focus groups (FG) and interviews (INT),
    regardless of community size.
    Our study shows that the complexity of transportation relates to
    older adults getting themselves to primary and community care in their
    own or a neighboring community, as well as receiving home and com­
    munity care from health care providers who must travel in from an
    urban center. As one participant said, “Sometimes it isn’t always people
    need[ing] to come to health care, health care needs to come to the people”
    (FG 2, SRT 1). Specialists from urban centers are not able to travel to
    rural towns year around. For example, the Diabetic Nurse Specialist
    makes monthly visits, except for winter and holidays, and “…the cardi­
    ologist comes up to [hospital in nearby rural town], but he won’t, and un­
    derstandably so, [come up] in the Winter. You know, who wants to risk
    driving off the road [in the mountains]?” (FG 2, SRT 5).
    Inclement weather impacts not only health care providers, but also
    rural-dwelling older adults needing to travel to urban centers for health

    care: “I would say [transportation is] one of the biggest issues I’d say for a lot
    of us, especially come Wintertime, when you’re looking at travelling on nasty
    roads, not too pleasant” (INT, SRT 2). Participants had to deal with “nasty
    weather” in addition to long distances when traveling to one of two
    small cities (Kamloops, Kelowna) to access the ER, lab, x-ray, and spe­
    cialists. Coordinating these visits for medical appointments was difficult
    for those reliant on public transportation: “When you make an appoint­
    ment with a specialist in Kamloops or Kelowna, they haven’t got time to think
    about how you are going to get there, so for old people, if somehow…they
    could coordinate the appointment with the buses” (FG, RT 2). Those having
    to travel to urban centers noted appointments were not always the same
    day, meaning they needed to pay for hotels and meals in addition to
    finding someone to drive them:
    Well, my neighbor had to go to Kelowna for a 20-min procedure and
    it cost him two nights in a hotel and meals, plus driving back and forth
    [~288 miles round trip]. And getting someone to do it for him because
    he can’t drive with his condition, so the system has downloaded a lot of
    costs to the sector which can least afford it – the patient (FG, SRT 3).
    The long distance to medical appointments in urban centers and the
    cost of this travel was raised frequently, with one participant suggesting
    older adults miss appointments to save money and time: “…there’s three
    hours travel time to go into Kamloops and back out again. Kelowna, well,
    even longer…plus the price of gas. For me, okay, I can suck it up, but for a lot
    of people [they might think]: ‘Oh my goodness! I don’t know whether or not
    I can afford to run in there for that length of time’” (INT, SRT 2).
    Some opted to drive back and forth rather than paying for a hotel and
    those eligible for the $70 reimbursement for travel costs from First
    Nations Health Authority noted it does not cover the actual travel costs,
    particularly for those driving old (non-fuel-efficient) vehicles. As one
    Indigenous Elder stated,

    medical appointments in large urban centers (e.g., Vancouver) was
    deemed an extremely valuable service, but does not eliminate all
    transportation challenges, as this dialogue indicates:
    P1: One of the bonuses is the Health Connections Bus though. It’s a
    five dollar, ten round-trip [cost]. But you do have to get in to [small
    rural town from a remote location] to connect with it.
    P2: And they get picked up and dropped at certain places in Kam­
    loops (FG 2, SRT 1).
    As a solution, study participants suggested “a total health center” or
    “one-stop shopping”, which meant the co-location of health care services:
    “I think the one-stop shopping thing… all sort of [health care services]
    bundled into one, so that you could go to one place … I think [this] would take
    a huge load off senior care” (FG, RT 2). This way one will not have to “go
    back and forth, here and there, especially for [Indigenous] Elders [who] don’t
    have enough energy to run all over the place” (INT, RT 1).
    The complexity of transportation issues for rural-dwelling older
    adults pertains to barriers (financial, environmental, linguistic, cultural)
    to accessing medically necessary health care services in urban centers as
    well as receiving care in their home communities from health care
    providers traveling out from urban centers. While Box 1 summarizes the
    transportation issues experienced by rural-dwelling older adults, the
    hypothetical case presented next provides an example of what these
    transportation issues look like for an older adult.
    A case of a rural-dwelling older adult’s access to health care
    services
    An older adult living in Williams Lake, a rural town three hours (180
    miles) northwest of Kamloops, must ensure their medical appointment
    (s) in Kamloops are booked for between 11 am and 3 pm on a Monday as
    the Health Connections bus only services Williams Lake the one day. To
    take advantage of the Health Connections bus which leaves Williams
    Lake at 7:30 am every Monday, they would need to book their seat by
    Thursday of the previous week and book the first HandyDART ride of the
    day (at 7 am) to ensure they arrive at the Health Connections bus stop in
    time for 7:30 am. If there are no delays due to weather (e.g., snow and
    ice) and/or road conditions (e.g., landslide or flooding), the Health
    Connections bus will arrive in Kamloops at 11:30 am. The older adult
    will then have approximately three-and-a-half hours in Kamloops for
    their medical appointment(s) and any errands (e.g., shopping) before
    the bus departs again at 3 pm, arriving in Williams Lake at the Health
    Connections bus stop by 7 pm. They would then take HandyDART to
    their home provided they booked two days in advance. If this traveler is
    an Indigenous Elder (with legal “status”) living on reserve, then they
    would need to arrange a ride to and from the Health Connections bus
    stop – unless their community is serviced by HandyDART – and can
    expect to be reimbursed $10 for all their meals during this (>12-h) trip.
    This arduous trip – in terms of both planning and duration – is one that
    older adults may need to repeat weekly and could have to take alone if
    there is no room on the bus for a family member or friend to accompany
    them.

    If you haven’t got a car that will go at least 30 miles to the gallon, you
    know, you have an old beater, they allow you $70 to go to Kamloops
    and back [~225 miles roundtrip]. And that’s, you know, like my old
    truck just to go to gas it up takes about 5 gallons of gas. You know, to
    fill my truck up is $150. That won’t even give me half a tank and
    won’t even get me to [name of a town halfway] and back [~122
    miles] (FG2, SRT 1, Indigenous Elder).
    A resident of a SRT indicated the multi-faceted nature of trans­
    portation problems, noting the lack of a taxi service which results in
    older adults needing to rely on neighbors and depend on HandyDART
    drivers: “And we don’t have a taxi…so people are totally reliant upon their
    neighbor for transportation. HandyDART exists…it is handled through BC
    Transit, so when the bus, the one bus circulates through town, has done its
    route, then it might have an hour to do its HandyDART trip on their terms and
    their timing, not on your [the older adult’s] terms and your [the older
    adult’s] timing or need” (FG 1, SRT 5).
    HandyDART came up frequently, with those able to register with and
    book HandyDART trips stating that they need to schedule trips in
    advance (pick-up and drop-off times) yet cannot book appointments at
    walk-in clinics nor arrive early enough to secure an appointment.
    I have to have a vision test for my license, which is coming [up on]
    Monday. I may not pass the vision part of it, so I am not sure how I
    will be able to get to the walk-in clinic. I live out here in [outer part of
    Kamloops], and the HandyDART doesn’t pick up people that early…
    It’s expensive for a cab and I can’t wait around the bus stops, so it’s
    very difficult, will be very difficult for me to get there, even if I can.
    And I’m speaking for other people presumably (FG 1, UC).

Discussion
    Our study carried out regionally unique research that makes visible
    the multi-faceted nature of transportation issues for rural-dwelling older
    adults in interior BC, including how this impacts service users and health
    care providers. Transportation was consistently identified as an issue by
    rural older adults in the studies mentioned previously (Averill, 2012;
    Bascu et al., 2014; Davenport et al., 2005; Grimmer et al., 2015; Hanlon
    & Halseth, 2005; Lafortune et al., 2015). Our study adds to the discus­
    sion on the complex nature of transportation as a SDOH for ruraldwelling older adults, and as a key consideration for the restructuring
    of health care services in rural areas. Study participants, most of whom

    At the same time, other participants were unable to access Handy­
    DART at all: “…when I needed that HandyDART for that one day, they never
    [came]. I applied for it two months before and right down to the last day, I
    had to hire somebody to take me up [to the hospital] for my cataract. I was so
    mad” (FG 3, UC, Indigenous Elder).
    The Health Connections bus that takes rural-dwelling people to
    4

Box 1
    Transportation Issues Experienced by Rural-Dwelling Older Adults.
    (Adapted from Hulko et al., 2020)
    • Coordinating medical appointments (e.g., with specialists in urban centers) with transportation that is only available on certain days of the
    week
    • Scheduling HandyDART for medical appointments that cannot be booked ahead of time (e.g., visit to the walk-in clinic)
    • Getting to the nearby Health Connections Bus stop on time in order to be taken to appointments in urban centers
    • Experiencing language and communication (e.g., sensory impairment) barriers when interacting with bus drivers
    • Depending on others (e.g., friends, neighbors, and family members) to help meet transportation needs
    • Receiving travel reimbursement that is less than actual costs (e.g., fuel costs for old vehicles, cost incurred by accompanying friend or family
    member)
    • Dealing with difficult driving conditions (e.g., during winter) and long distances that block or delay access to health care services
    • Receiving less frequent (e.g., monthly) and shorter visits by health professionals (e.g., Diabetes Nurse Specialist) during winter

    were living on low incomes, identified their costs were higher when
    required to travel to urban centers. This corresponds with findings that
    having to travel to urban centers for health care is a drain on financial
    and emotional resources for older adults (Allan, Ball, & Alston, 2007;
    Office of the Seniors Advocate, 2018). Even participants from the urban
    center (Kamloops) faced challenges with transportation – e.g., Handy­
    DART not being able to pick up people very early or for same-day ap­
    pointments, resulting in people having to rely on taxis – an expensive
    option.
    Access to transportation is fundamental to healthy aging-in-place
    (Chappell, 2021), and its recognition as a SDOH is vital to ruraldwelling older adults who may require ongoing access to health care
    services (Hansen et al., 2021). Well-known SDOH models such as the
    one by Mikkonen and Raphael (2010) do not name transportation or
    geography (rural and remote) as a SDOH. Such SDOH models appear to
    be more conducive to urban rather than rural and remote situations
    where one’s housing may be located hundreds of miles away from health
    care services with little access through HandyDART.
    While the health care restructuring that IH is undertaking caters to
    key SDOH, including transportation, there is still a need for solutions to
    address the complex transportation challenges experienced by urbandwelling older adults as well as rural-dwelling older adults who are
    expected to travel to urban centers to access health care services (Han­
    sen et al., 2021). Like previous research that shows Indigenous people
    experience increased transportation barriers when accessing health care
    services (Call et al., 2006; Ryser & Halseth, 2012), rural- and urbandwelling First Nation Elders in our study also identified transportation
    as an issue. This emphasizes the need for restructuring efforts to also
    address barriers for those living in First Nation communities – whether
    rural or urban.
    Policy makers and planners should consider ways to acknowledge
    and compensate people who volunteer their time to drive family mem­
    bers, friends, or neighbors to appointments. The Office of the Seniors
    Advocate, (2018) recommends that volunteer drivers should be eligible
    to receive tax deductions, like those who use their vehicles for business.
    Yet, this may not adequately address the issue of transportation if those
    with a vehicle or an acquaintance (family, friend, neighbor) with a
    vehicle are more likely to access health care services when compared to
    those who lack access to a vehicle (Syed et al., 2013). Since there is
    inequitable distribution of health care professionals in rural and remote
    regions (Wilson et al., 2009), there is a need to reduce rural-dwelling
    older adults’ repeat visits to urban centers. Policies need to consider
    single-purpose resources available for multi-purpose uses (e.g., using
    school bus to transport older adults when not needed for school pick-up
    and drop-off); and health care teams going to the people rather than
    people coming to them. This should be a year-round service, not a sea­
    sonal one, as those with diabetes need access to a specialist in the winter

    too.
    The notion of a total health center or a one-stop shopping mentioned is
    consistent with Ryser and Halseth’s (2012) idea about the “one-stop
    shops” (p. 340) – a strategy which aims to combine travel information
    and financial supports to streamline services for older adults. Munici­
    palities, health authorities, and provincial and federal governments
    need to make significant investments in transportation infrastructure,
    programs, and personnel to assist rural dwelling older adults to age in
    place. While Kamloops is already seeing this, newer training campuses
    need to be initiated and established in rural communities for health care
    professional students so they can be attracted and retained in rural and
    remote communities.
Conclusion
    By analyzing the multi-faceted nature of transportation, we recom­
    mend that restructuring efforts aimed at improving community-based
    care and aging-in-place include strategies that address transportation
    infrastructure and promote equitable access to health care services. Our
    study goes beyond a recognition that “transportation is an issue” to
    describe – from the perspective of older adult service users – the specific
    challenges that administrators, decision-makers and practitioners need
    to address to support aging-in-place outside the urban centers of BC’s
    interior. Transportation barriers need to be addressed immediately
    through system-level solutions that begin with assessing transportation
    needs and challenges of care recipients, linking up HandyDART and
    primary and community care services, and ensuring that a greater range
    of health care services are available in small cities and rural towns either
    physically (e.g., lab) or remotely (e.g., telemedicine).
    During the COVID-19 pandemic, IH had to reorient many of their
    services to remote delivery (e.g., doctor’s visits, physiotherapy, social
    work). It will be important to continue remote delivery once the
    pandemic is over to guarantee access for rural and remote residents,
    among other populations. This would prevent older adults from having
    to make multiple trips for medical appointments or self-fund either the
    return portion of their travel or the costs of an overnight stay. It would
    also address some of the health inequities that diverse groups of rural
    older adults have experienced during the pandemic (Hulko & Mirza,
    2021). While our participants included older adults with physical dis­
    abilities who used assistive and medical devices (canes, walkers,
    wheelchairs, continuous oxygen therapy), they did not discuss their
    assistive devices in relation to transportation issues. Given the trans­
    portation related systemic issues identified, we can expect more and
    distinct obstacles for disabled rural older adults seeking access to basic
    health care.
    Solutions need to be tailored to individual localities rather than
    adopting a “cookie-cutter approach” (Hulko et al., 2020). System-wide
    5

    N.A. Mirza and W. Hulko

    Journal of Aging Studies 60 (2022) 101002

    solutions are critical as well. Our recommendation is to continue inte­
    grating transportation into the health care system through health care
    restructuring initiatives that prioritize transportation as a key SDOH for
    rural-dwelling older adults. Acting in this way could ensure that older
    adults are able to age in place in rural and remote communities within
    BC’s interior and receive health care that is affordable and equivalent to
    their urban peers. Our research provides evidence to encourage policy
    makers to tackle transportation as an important SDOH so health care can
    be more accessible and conducive to the needs of rural communities. By
    embracing rural-dwelling service users, administrators in local health
    authorities can ensure that rural perspectives are given the opportunity
    to influence health care decisions, thereby respecting the citizenship
    rights of those aging in place beyond the urban core.

    Grimmer, K., Kay, D., Foot, J., & Pastakia, K. (2015). Consumer views about aging-inplace. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 10, 1803–1811. https://doi.org/10.2147/CIA.
    S90672
    Hanlon, N., & Halseth, G. (2005). The greying of resource communities in northern
    British Columbia: Implications for health care delivery in already under-serviced
    communities. Canadian Geographer / Le Géographe Canadien, 49(1), 1–24. https://
    doi.org/10.1111/j.0008-3658.2005.00077.x
    Hansen, S., Newbold, K. B., Scott, D. M., Vrkljan, B., Grenier, A., & Huang, K. (2021).
    Rural ageing and transportation: How a lack of transportation options can leave
    older rural populations stranded. In M. Skinner, R. Winterton, & K. Walsh (Eds.),
    Rural gerontology: Towards critical perspectives on rural ageing (pp. 140–151). London:
    Routledge.
    Health Canada. (2019, June 28). What determines health. Retrieved from https://www.
    canada.ca/en/public-health/services/health-promotion/population-health/what
    -determines-health.html.
    Health Research & Educational Trust. (2017 November). Social determinants of health
    series: Transportation and the role of hospitals. Chicago, IL: Health Research &
    Educational Trust. Retrieved on November 15, 2019 from www.aha.org/transporta
    tion.
    Hsieh, H.-F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
    Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), 1277–1288. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    1049732305276687
    Hulko, W., & Mirza, N. (May 13, 2021). In early media coverage of the COVID-19
    pandemic older adults in rural areas were neglected. The Conversation. https://the
    conversation.com/in-early-media-coverage-of-the-covid-19-pandemic-older-adultsin-rural-areas-were-neglected-154621.
    Hulko, W., Mirza, N., & Seeley, L. (2020). Older adults’ views on the repositioning of
    primary and community care. Canadian Journal on Aging / La Revue Canadienne Du
    Vieillissement, 40(1), 114–126. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980819000540
    Kamloops Local Action Team [LAT]. (2015, October). Taking the next steps:
    Repositioning health care for older adults Kamloops final report. Interior Health.
    Kamloops, BC.
    Lafortune, C., Huson, K., Santi, S., & Stolee, P. (2015). Community-based primary health
    care for older adults: A qualitative study of the perceptions of clients, caregivers and
    health care providers. BioMed Central Geriatrics, 15(57), 1–11. https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s12877-015-0052-x
    Mattson, J. W. (2010). Aging and mobility in rural and small urban areas: A survey of
    North Dakota. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 30(6), 700–718. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/0733464810378107
    Menec, V. H., Hutton, L., Newall, N., Nowicki, S., Spina, J., & Veselyuk, D. (2013). How
    ‘age-friendly’ are rural communities and what community characteristics are related
    to age-friendliness? The case of rural Manitoba, Canada. Ageing and Society, 35(1),
    203–223. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0144686X13000627
    Mikkonen, J., & Raphael, D. (2010). Social determinants of health: The Canadian facts.
    Toronto, ON: York University School of Health Policy and Management.
    Office of the Seniors Advocate. (2018, May 10). Seniors transportation: Affordable,
    appropriate, and available. Office of the Seniors Advocate. Victoria, BC. Retrieved from
    https://www.seniorsadvocatebc.ca/app/uploads/sites/4/2018/05/Seniors-Transp
    ortation-Report.pdf.
    Ryser, L., & Halseth, G. (2012). Resolving mobility constraints impeding rural seniors’
    access to regionalized services. Journal of Aging & Social Policy, 24(3), 328–344.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/08959420.2012.683329
    Syed, S. T., Gerber, B. S., & Sharp, L. K. (2013). Traveling towards disease:
    Transportation barriers to health care access. Journal of Community Health, 38(5),
    976–993. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-013-9681-1
    Webber, S. C., Porter, M. M., & Menec, V. H. (2010). Mobility in older adults: A
    comprehensive framework. Gerontologist, 50(4), 443–450. https://doi.org/10.1093/
    geront/gnq013
    Wilson, N. W., Couper, I. D., De Vries, E., Reid, S., Fish, T., & Marais, B. J. (2009).
    A critical review of interventions to redress the inequitable distribution of healthcare
    professionals to rural and remote areas. Rural and Remote Health, 9(2), 1060.

Funding sources
    This research study was awarded an Evidence-Informed Practice
    Grant [IHRGC_2016-11] by Interior Health.
    Declaration of competing interest
    The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.
References
    Allan, J., Ball, P., & Alston, M. (2007). Developing sustainable models of rural health
    care: A community development approach. Rural and Remote Health, 7(4), 818.
    Averill, J. (2012). Priorities for action in a rural older adults study. Family & Community
    Health, 35(4), 358–372. https://doi.org/10.1097/FCH.0b013e318266686e
    Bascu, J., Jeffery, B., Novik, N., Abonyi, S., Oosman, S., Johnson, S., & Martz, D. (2014).
    Policy, community, and kin: Interventions that support rural healthy aging. Activities,
    Adaptation, & Aging, 38(2), 138–155.
    BC Ministry of Health [BC MOH]. (2015). Rural health services in B.C.: A policy
    framework to provide a system of quality care. Retrieved from http://www.health.
    gov.bc.ca/library/publications/year/2015/rural-health-policypaper.pdf.
    British Columbia [BC] Alliance for Healthy Living. BC on the move in a healthier
    direction: Submission to the Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure.
    Considering health in the province’s ten-year transportation plan. Retrieved on
    November 22, 2019 from https://www.bchealthyliving.ca/bc-on-the-move-in-a-hea
    lthier-direction-2/.
    Call, K. T., McAlpine, D. D., Johnson, P. J., Beebe, T. J., McRae, J. A., & Song, Y. (2006).
    Barriers to care among American Indians in public health care programs. Medical
    Care, 44(6), 595–600. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mlr.0000215901.37144.94
    Chappell, N. L. (2021). Transportation for an aging society. In I. Rootman, P. Edwards,
    M. Levasseur, & F. Grunberg (Eds.), Promoting the health of older adults: The Canadian
    experience (pp. 122–134). Toronto: Canadian Scholars.
    Davenport, J., Rathwell, T., & Rosenberg, M. (2005). Service provision for seniors:
    Challenges for communities in Atlantic Canada. Longwoods Review, 3(3), 9–16.
    https://doi.org/10.12927/hcq.2005.17716
    Evans, N., Allotey, P., Imelda, J. D., Reidpath, D. D., & Pool, R. (2018). Social support
    and care arrangements of older people living alone in rural Malaysia. Ageing and
    Society, 38(10), 2061–2081. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0144686X17000472
    First Nations Health Authority (FNHA). (2019, September). First Nations health benefits:
    Medical transportation. Author. Retrieved from https://www.fnha.ca/Document
    s/FNHA-First-Nations-Health-Medical-Transportation-Fact-Sheet.pdf.